# Chapter 4 explored how identifying outliers can give you an edge in beating the

Chapter 4 explored how identifying outliers can give you an edge in beating the
market. We use these techniques to identify undervalued stocks ( value investing ) or
look for companies with new technologies or business models that will outperform
others ( growth investing ). This approach, however, also means settling for delayed
gratification. We might have to wait years until our shares have gained enough cap-
ital appreciation to sell them again for enough profit.
 For many who have experienced challenging jobs or projects, just seeing the
rewards of investment portfolios on a cash account and mapping them with exist-
ing recurring expenses triggers a strong feeling of freedom and assurance. The
more you rely on your salary, the more permanent your job feels. The moment you
stop needing it, every job feels temporary.This chapter covers
Strategies to create passive income
Finding stocks that pay solid dividends
When to choose bonds over stocks for income 
portfolios
Using cryptocurrency staking to generate 
passive income

106 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
 This chapter will focus on passive income—investments with recurring payouts.
While the previous chapter focused exclusively on stocks, this chapter will also explore
two other asset types: bonds and cryptocurrency. Let’s begin by examining how to
maximize recurring payments through stock dividends.
NOTE Fixed income  refers to an investment that pays the investor a fixed amount
on a fixed schedule. However, many typical fixed-income investments have
variants where we get varying payments on a fixed schedule (e.g., bonds with
a floating rate or crypto staking rewards). For that reason, the term passive
income is broader as it considers these fluctuations.
5.1 Dividends
A dividend  is a portion of a company’s profit that is paid to its shareholders. To under-
stand the purpose of dividends, let’s consider how companies evolve after they are
incorporated.
 In their early stages, companies focus on growth and establishing a foothold in
their markets. Revenue is reinvested into expansion, whether by hiring new employ-
ees, developing improved products or services, or increasing operational capacity.
During this phase, companies typically don’t pay dividends. Instead, shareholders of
startups benefit primarily from the potential for exponential growth—the transforma-
tion of a small garage-based enterprise into a thriving, steady business. Investing in
these evolving companies often follows the high-risk, high-reward principle.
 As a company matures and establishes itself
in the market, its growth rate slows. At this stage,
companies generate consistent profits, and
investing all of their earnings in an even more
aggressive campaign to grow further would no
longer pay off, as they have already established
themselves as leaders in the most profitable
markets. Instead, this stability allows them to
pay a portion of their profits to shareholders as
dividends, making them attractive to investors
seeking passive income. Mature companies pay-
ing regular dividends often represent lower-
risk investment opportunities.
 This lifecycle of company evolution aligns
with the Boston Consulting Group (BCG)
Growth-Share Matrix. As illustrated in figure 5.1,
the ideal dividend-paying stock is a “cash cow”—
a business that generates stable profits with mini-
mal reinvestment requirements, allowing surplus
funds to be distributed to shareholders.Star
DogQuestion Mark
Cash CowLow High
High
LowMarket Share
Growth
Figure 5.1 The BCG Growth-Share 
Matrix as a reference for picking 
dividend-paying companies that are 
likely cash cows (© https:/ /productfolio
.com/growth-share-matrix/ )

107 5.1 Dividends
 We must first clarify our criteria for using data to identify dividend stocks. It’s not
just larger companies with higher market capitalizations that are more likely to pay
dividends; the type of industry also plays a crucial role. For example, companies in the
utilities sector tend to pay higher dividends than those in the technology industry.
Consider a utility company that supplies water or electricity to homes. Their business
model is stable and supported by extensive infrastructure, such as pipelines and
cables. This infrastructure acts as an economic moat—a competitive advantage that
makes it difficult for rivals to encroach on their market share. At the same time, these
companies face challenges in driving competitors out of other regions, as those rivals
possess similar infrastructure elsewhere.
 While the risks of losses are minimized in such industries, the growth potential is
also limited. Figure 5.2 outlines examples of economic moats, highlighting how a long
profit history in a saturated market and minimal competitive threats create the per-
fect conditions for a stable, dividend-paying company.
Conversely, most tech companies must continuously invest in R&D to stay in business
and find the next big thing in the market. Apple, Microsoft, NVIDIA, and other major
tech firms would cease to thrive if they stopped investing in research or acquiring
innovative startups that bring new products and ideas to them. For these companies, it
makes sense to keep dividend payments small to allocate more funds toward innova-
tion and research initiatives.
Proprietary Information
Innovation
Network Effect
Locked-Up
SupplyRegional
OligopoliesIntellectual
PropertyScaleBrand Loyalty
Figure 5.2 Examples of economic moats

108 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
One reference example of a dividend stock is the Coca-Cola Company. Its economic
moat is its brand recognition. Supermarkets and restaurants are unlikely to remove
Coca-Cola from their shelves or menus, making it hard to imagine the company’s cash
flow running dry.
 However, detecting long-term cash flow risks is essential. Take the tobacco industry
as an example. Many tobacco companies pay excellent dividends, but as an investor,
you must decide what future you foresee for them. Some argue that tobacco products
are in decline and that the industry will face severe challenges when the percentage of
smokers in the population becomes negligible. Others believe these companies will
successfully transform to provide alternative products with better prospects than tradi-
tional cigarettes. Regardless of your belief, investing in companies within an industry
without confidence in their long-term success is unwise. 
 In chapter 2, we partially covered dividend metrics and ratios, but now we need to
go deeper. Applying the algorithm becomes trivial if we know what to look for. The
following parameters can be essential for finding suitable dividend investments:
Annual payout —The total amount paid out per share per year.
Dividend payout frequency —How often dividends are paid out per year, which is
usually monthly, quarterly, semi-annually, annually, or irregularly. In most cases,
yearly payouts are distributed equally. For example, a $1 annual payout per
share results in $0.25 per quarter if paid quarterly.
Dividend yield —Calculated by dividing the annual payout per share by the share
price. A high dividend yield isn’t always a positive indicator; it can also signal a
falling share price, which increases the risk of a reduced annual payout.Examples of economic moats
Here are some examples of economic moats per category:
Proprietary information —Coca-Cola’s secret formula gives it a competitive
advantage by making its product difficult to replicate.
Brand loyalty —Apple customers are highly loyal and willing to pay premium
prices for iPhones despite alternatives with similar or better specs.
Innovation —Tesla disrupted the auto industry by pioneering electric vehicle
technology, battery efficiency, and self-driving capabilities.
Scale —Amazon benefits from economies of scale, offering lower prices and
faster shipping than smaller competitors.
Network effect —Facebook (Meta) becomes more valuable as more people
join, making it difficult for competitors to attract users.
Locked-up supply —De Beers historically controlled the diamond supply,
restricting access and maintaining high prices.
Intellectual property —Pfizer’s patents on drugs such as Viagra and COVID-19
vaccines prevent competitors from replicating their products.
Regional oligopolies —Utilities such as electricity providers in many regions
operate as regulated monopolies or oligopolies, facing little to no competition.

109 5.1 Dividends
Dividend growth —This metric tracks how many years a company has consistently
increased its dividends. Companies with long histories of raising dividends,
such as Coca-Cola with 62 years of increases, are considered reliable long-term
income stocks.
Dividend growth rate —The rate at which a company grows its dividends. Some
companies grow their dividends faster than others, but larger companies may
take a slower approach to increases.
Payout ratio —The fraction of a company’s net income paid to shareholders. A
smaller payout ratio suggests more room for growth and reinvestment.
Residence of the company —Your residency can affect taxation. For example, non-
US investors may face additional taxes when investing in US-based companies
compared to those headquartered elsewhere.
The script in listing 5.1 calculates the dividend growth per year. To do this, we calcu-
late the sum of dividends paid in the first and last year, and then we can determine the
average yearly increase. Next, we calculate the payouts per year by counting the fre-
quency of dividend payments and deducting the payment frequency.
def calc_div_growth_rate (stock):
    try:
        dividends = stock.dividends
        if dividends.empty:
            return None, None
        dividends_by_year = dividends.resample('YE').sum()  
        if len(dividends_by_year) > 1:                      
            first_year = dividends_by_year.index[0].year    
            last_year = dividends_by_year.index[-1].year    
            first_dividend = dividends_by_year.iloc[0]      
            last_dividend = dividends_by_year.iloc[-1]      
            num_years = last_year - first_year              
            cagr = ((last_dividend / first_dividend) 
                ** (1 / num_years)) - 1                     
        else:
            cagr = None
        payouts_per_year = dividends.resample('YE').
                count().mean()                         
        if payouts_per_year > 3.5:                     
            payout_frequency = "Quarterly"             
        elif payouts_per_year > 1.5:                   
            payout_frequency = "Semi-Annual"           
        elif payouts_per_year > 0.5:                   
            payout_frequency = "Annual"                
        else:
            payout_frequency = "Irregular"Listing 5.1 Calculating dividend growth
Gets the 
dividend sum 
by years
Calculates 
growth rate 
(CAGR)
Determines 
payout 
frequency

110 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
        return cagr, payout_frequency
    except Exception as e:
        print(f"Error processing {stock}: {e}")
        return None, None
Executing listing 5.2 loads companies from the S&P 500 index and extracts their divi-
dend metrics. As the results of executing the code will vary depending on the execution
time, we’ll look at some results we got during the execution while writing this book. 
 In the second method, we collect ticker data through the tickers and filter by divi-
dend-paying companies and those whose market cap exceeds a minimum threshold.
This threshold is passed to the function as a parameter.
import requests
import pandas as pd
import yfinance as yf
from io import StringIO
def get_sp500_tickers():
    url = "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/"
        "List_of_S%26P_500_companies"               
    response = requests.get(url)                    
    tables = pd.read_html(StringIO(response.text))  
    sp500_table = tables[0]                         
    return sp500_table["Symbol"].tolist()           
def get_stocks_with_dividends_and_high_market_cap\
    (tickers, market_cap_threshold):
    data = []
    for ticker in tickers:                
        try:
            stock = yf.Ticker(ticker)     
            info = stock.info             
            if info.get("dividendYield") and 
                   info.get("marketCap") >= market_cap_threshold:
                cagr, payout_frequency = (
                    calc_div_growth_rate(stock))          
                data.append({
                    "Ticker": ticker,                     
                    "Name": info.get("longName", "N/A"),  
                    "Market Cap": info.get("marketCap"),  
                    "Dividend Yield": info.
                    get("dividendYield"),                 
                    "Sector": info.get("sector", "N/A"),  
                    "payoutRatio": info.
                    get("payoutRatio", "N/A"),            
                    "dividendRate": info.
                    get("dividendRate", "N/A"),           
                    "cagr": cagr,                         
                    "payout_frequency": payout_frequency, 
                })Listing 5.2 Executing code
Collects all 
tickers from S&P 
500 companies
Collects company 
data from all tickers
Gets dividend data

111 5.1 Dividends
        except Exception as e:
            print(f"Error processing {ticker}: {e}")
    return pd.DataFrame(data)
Running this code, we can review various companies in the DataFrame and form
investment theses. Let’s look at some outliers. Thermo Fisher Scientific (TMO) has a
low payout ratio—at the time of writing, it’s 7.09%. At the same time, dividend payments
have grown for some years. Therefore, an investor could assess this company now based
on the theory that TMO has a lot of room to grow if we compare the payout ratios to
those of other companies. An investor who believes in the long-term business model of
TMO could see an investment in this company as a long-term investment.
Real estate investment trusts
Real estate investment trusts (REITs) can be viewed as a distinct category among div-
idend-paying stocks. If you’re seeking steady cash flow and diversification in your
income portfolio, REITs are a compelling option. They offer several advantages for
building an income portfolio:
High dividend yields —REITs are required by law to distribute at least 90% of
their taxable income to shareholders as dividends, resulting in consistent
and often higher-than-average yields compared to traditional dividend stocks.
Portfolio diversification —Adding REITs introduces real estate exposure to your
portfolio, diversifying away from equities and bonds. Real estate tends to
have low correlation with other asset classes, providing stability.
Hedge against inflation —Real estate assets typically appreciate over time, and
rental income often rises with inflation, making REITs a good inflation hedge.
Liquidity —Unlike directly owning property, publicly traded REITs can be bought
and sold on stock exchanges, offering liquidity without the complexities of
managing real estate.
Professional management —Professionals manage REITs, meaning you bene-
fit from their expertise in property acquisition, development, and leasing with-
out needing to handle them yourself.
Accessibility —REITs allow small investors to gain exposure to real estate with-
out requiring significant capital investments. You can invest in a wide range of
property types (e.g., residential, commercial, industrial) with minimal cost.
Tax benefits —While dividends from REITs are typically taxed as ordinary
income, some REIT dividends may qualify for the 20% pass-through deduction
under US tax laws, reducing your effective tax rate.
A variety of options —REITs span different sectors, including health care, retail,
residential, and data centers, allowing you to tailor your portfolio to specific
real estate trends or needs.
Steady income streams —Many REITs generate predictable cash flows from long-
term leases or stable tenant relationships, making them a reliable source of
income.

112 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
We can also examine another company from our DataFrame, Exxon Mobil (XOM). At
the time of writing, Exxon has a high dividend yield (3.70%), and its dividend pay-
ments have grown over the years. A dividend investor might consider buying Exxon
with the idea that this company will keep growing, and, at the same time, the investors
will harvest solid dividend payments from the start that can grow above bond yields,
which we’ll look at next.
5.2 Bonds
If you own a share of a company, you can brag at parties that it’s partly yours. However,
those who are literate about investing won’t be impressed with your ownership of
Apple, NVIDIA, or any other company unless your portfolio has beaten the market
and you can be considered a master of capital appreciation.
 While dealing with stocks involves equity, the bond business model relates to debt.
In other words, bonds follow an IOU model: you lend money to someone, and the
borrower pays interest until they return the borrowed money in full. The basic princi-
ple of bonds is outlined in figure 5.3.
City wants to
build a bridge.City sells a 10-year
bond to raise money.
A private investor
purchases a bond.
The investor receives interest
payments until the principal is
repaid.
Figure 5.3 A plain vanilla bond

113 5.2 Bonds
Many attributes define a bond’s details, also called the indenture . Let’s look at the par-
ticulars affecting how you can lend money and benefit from that:
Borrower —The borrower refers to the party who receives the money. You can lend
money, for instance, to the federal government, municipalities, or companies.
Maturation date —This parameter defines the day the borrower must repay the
principal  (the total amount of borrowed money) to the lender. The time to
maturity of a bond at its emission can vary from months to decades.
Coupon payments —Eventually, a coupon rate is an investor’s annual payment
while holding a particular bond. Rates can also be floating or fixed, meaning
coupon rates may change over time for some bonds. 
Risk rating —A bond’s interest rate depends strongly on the borrower’s default
risk. The higher the risk, the higher the rate. Therefore, a third party needs to
evaluate the default risk. Figure 5.4 outlines the rating structure of Moody’s and
Standard & Poor (S&P), two rating agencies in the United States.
Payment modalities —For cash flow planning, investors must also know when they
get their payments. The payment modalities define, among other things, how
often and when the lender receives money. In many cases, coupon payments
are made quarterly.
In its simplest form, a vanilla bond  is an IOU with fixed coupon payment intervals and a
set maturation date. However, there are many variations. For instance, some bonds allow
borrowers to repay the principal in intervals alongside coupon payments, similar to how
mortgage payments work. Bonds can also be collateralized, meaning that if the bor-
rower defaults, an asset can be liquidated to repay the lender. This is akin to real estate
foreclosures, where a property is seized if the owner can’t keep up with payments. 
 While this book focuses on basic scenarios, it’s worth noting that more complex
variations of bonds are the subject of advanced certifications, such as the Chartered
Financial Analyst (CFA). The job of a rating agency is to evaluate bonds offered on the
bond market and to rate them. The higher the risk, the higher the returns an issuer
offers to attract possible lenders. Table 5.1 shows the rating categories of the three big
rating agencies in the United States.
Table 5.1 Rating of bonds
Rating tier Moody’s S&P Fitch Meaning
Investment Grade
Highest quality Aaa AAA AAA Prime credit quality, lowest 
risk
High quality Aa1, Aa2, Aa3 AA+, AA, AA- AA+, AA, AA- Very high credit quality
Upper medium 
gradeA1, A2, A3 A+, A, A- A+, A, A- Strong capacity to meet 
financial commitments

114 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios