# Chapter 1 highlights two standard ways to earn money through investment: passive

Chapter 1 highlights two standard ways to earn money through investment: passive
income and capital appreciation. As shown with bonds, coupon payments generate pas-
sive income. Bonds also offer the potential for capital appreciation. When issued, inves-
tors buy them on the primary market, where financial institutions act as intermediaries
between the borrower and lender, setting an initial price (known as the face value  or par
value ). Before the maturation date, bonds can be traded on the secondary market,
where their price fluctuates. If the price rises above the face value, the bond trades above
par; if it falls below, it trades below par. Buying a bond at a 5% discount to its face value
means that 5% contributes to your yield upon maturity when the principal is repaid.
Let’s explore fixed-income assets from the US Treasury as a reference example.
Depending on their durations, they are categorized as Treasury bills (maturing in up
to one year), Treasury notes (maturing in up to 10 years), or Treasury bonds (matur-
ing in more than 10 years). For further details, see https:/ /mng.bz/lZPR .
 Data can help identify bonds with projected yields higher than alternative invest-
ments. The Federal Reserve’s interest rate policies directly influence bond prices andLower medium 
gradeBaa1, Baa2, 
Baa3BBB+, BBB, 
BBB-BBB+, BBB, 
BBB-Adequate capacity, some 
susceptibility to conditions
Speculative grade
Upper 
speculativeBa, Ba, Ba3 BB+, BB, BB- BB+, BB, BB- Higher risk of default, but 
financial commitment met
Highly 
speculativeB1, B2, B3 B+, B, B- B+, B, B- Material default risk, but 
financial obligations still met
Substantial risk Caa1, Caa2, 
Caa3CCC+, CCC, 
CCC-CCC+, CCC, 
CCC-Very high risk, substantial 
vulnerability to default
Near default Ca CC, C CC, C Highly vulnerable to default
Default C D RD, D In default
Why selling bonds before the maturation date may not always be unwise
Common sense tells us that if we lend $10,000 to someone, selling the debt to a
third party for a smaller amount would be unwise. If we get our regular interest pay-
ments and principal back in full at maturity, why should we sell something for a loss?
Contemplating such scenarios brings us closer to thinking like economists and fore-
casting. Investors might sell bonds as the market changes, and the possible capital
appreciation of investing the money received by selling the bond below $10,000
might be higher than $10,000 plus all the coupon payments until then. Chapter 11
goes into detail about forecasting and making decisions based on forecasts.Table 5.1 Rating of bonds  (continued)
Rating tier Moody’s S&P Fitch Meaning

115 5.2 Bonds
yields. When the Fed raises rates, new bonds are issued with higher yields to match
prevailing rates, making existing bonds with lower yields less attractive and causing
their prices to drop. Conversely, when the Fed lowers rates, existing bonds with higher
yields become more appealing. Additionally, high interest rates increase default risks
for weaker borrowers. Understanding interest rate trends is crucial when deciding
between investing in stocks or bonds. The following code demonstrates how to collect
bond interest rates using the EODHD platform introduced in chapter 3:
import requests
def fetch(country_code):
    url = 
f’https://eodhd.com/api/eod/{country_code}.GBOND?api_token={eod_api_key}
&fmt=json’
    return requests.get(url).json()
import pandas as pd
us = pd.DataFrame(data=fetch("US10Y"))
We can now plot the results and explore the outcome. Looking at the rates when plot-
ting the graph, we can reason that investing in a bond would have been a better deci-
sion than in previous times, as shown in figure 5.4:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
p = us[["date", "adjusted_close"]]
p.set_index("date", inplace=True)
p.plot(figsize = (12,8), fontsize = 12)
plt.ylabel("Price (USD)")
plt.title("yield Price Chart", fontsize = 15)
plt.show()
Alternatively, we can analyze high-risk bonds, often referred to as junk bonds, and use
data to determine if some are undervalued relative to their ratings. Unfortunately, the
free EODHD version is limited and doesn’t provide corporate data. The following
code uses an alternative open platform to load data from an International Securities
Identification Number (ISIN), a bond identifier. The REST API returns the metadata
for the bond based on the input:
import requests
headers = {
    “Content-Type”: “application/json”,
    “X-OPENFIGI-APIKEY”: OPEN_FIGI_KEY
}
isin = "US36166NAJ28"  # Example ISIN
data = [{"idType": "ID_ISIN", "idValue": isin}]
response = requests.post("https://api.openfigi.com/v3/mapping",
                          headers=headers, json=data)
print(response.json())

116 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
This approach is highly speculative and may require insider knowledge. Another
speculative tool is the credit default swap  (CDS), which some readers may recognize from
the movie The Big Short.  A CDS acts as an insurance contract against bond default: you
pay an ongoing premium, and if the debtor defaults, the insurer compensates you for
the bond’s full value. Interestingly, CDS can be detached from the original lender. For
example, if A borrows money from B, C can purchase an insurance from D that is paid
to C when B defaults.
 Michael Burry famously used data to predict the 2007 financial crisis, betting on
the defaults of various collateralized debt obligations (CDOs)—packages of bundled
bonds. His foresight proved correct, showcasing how deep data analysis can uncover
opportunities and risks.
 While these advanced strategies offer potential, they are complex and risky. For
simplicity, bonds can still provide steady yields with lower risk than stocks. Data can
help determine whether dividend-paying stocks or bonds are better suited for passive
income. Next, we explore a third passive income option: cryptocurrency.
Figure 5.4 Return of US Treasury bonds

117 5.3 Crypto staking
5.3 Crypto staking
Most individuals who accumulated significant wealth through cryptocurrency did so
via capital appreciation. They invested in cryptocurrency at low prices during its
nascent stages or after one of its crashes and reaped substantial gains as its value
soared. Crypto enthusiasts argue that cryptocurrencies, with a few exceptions, have a
constant capital appreciation as a scarce resource. As there can never be more than 21
million BTC, the idea is that the value of Bitcoin will always increase. Consequently, if
you believe in the long-term value of crypto, there isn’t much more to say, as all you
need to do is wait for the right time to sell.
 This chapter focuses on strategies to generate passive income with cryptocurrency,
as there is still much to learn. But before that, we need to recap some crypto basics to
be able to invest.
5.3.1 Ledgers and exchanges
One thing enthusiasts and critics may agree on is the number of scams and the poten-
tial risks of losing money with crypto if you don’t know what you’re doing. Even if we
don’t go into speculative actions in this book, exploring some risk management basics
is necessary.
WARNING Knowledge of cryptocurrency reduces your risk of being a victim of
fraud or scam. However, the cryptocurrency industry is highly unregulated,
and even experienced crypto traders have lost considerable amounts of
money. Cryptocurrency is likely to remain a risky investment.
The term “lost cryptocurrencies,” as used by the media, can lead to misconceptions
because cryptocurrencies can’t be lost. However, crypto holders can lose their keys,
confirming their cryptocurrency ownership. We’ll explain this in detail by illustrating
how cryptocurrency works, as depicted in figure 5.5.
Exchange LedgerAccount Account
Figure 5.5 If you hold cryptocurrency on an exchange, the exchange owns the keys signing the 
transactions on the blockchain. Ledgers, such as cold wallets, provide ways to store the keys that 
signed the last transaction in a safe place. Be aware that cryptocurrency, a distributed transaction 
log, is a public blockchain and therefore never stored on your device or account.

118 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
In its simplest technical terms, blockchain is all about private keys that sign blocks of
an immutable, distributed transaction log during a transaction. Cryptocurrency mon-
etizes this principle. The more blocks are signed with your key, the more ownership
you have.
 We can use accounts on exchanges, such as Binance or OKX. For investors work-
ing with brokers, using an exchange seems like having a brokerage account from a
bird’s-eye view. Exchanges invest to ensure that your account on their platform is as
safe as possible from attacks by hackers. They will encourage—or even enforce—all
kinds of account protection mechanisms, such as multifactor authentication. Their
user interfaces are user-friendly, aiming to make it easy to buy and sell cryptocurrency.
 However, we need to go into more detail to understand the problems many inves-
tors see with an exchange. Exchanges enable you to trigger transactions using your
user account; however, the exchanges sign the transaction with their keys, which is the
source of the slogan “Not your keys, not your coins.” Most cryptocurrency exchanges
reside in countries where it’s difficult to regulate them. The risks of this lack of regula-
tion have become apparent with the FTX scandal, in which the company misused the
investments of private investors, and its principal founder, Sam Bankman-Fried,
became a symbol of crypto fraud.
 To completely control your crypto investments, you need to be in control of the
keys that are used for transactions. You can store your keys on your physical devices (a
hardware ledger or cold wallet) or on software service providers who provide you with
the keys (a software ledger or warm wallet). The concept is the same: crypto transac-
tions are signed, but in the case of a ledger, transactions are signed with your key. You
still need to protect your keys, but you’ve vastly reduced your exposure to market risks
(namely, that the value of your cryptocurrency might go down) and cyberattacks on
the blockchain.
5.3.2 Mining and staking
Crypto user forums are flooded with offers on how to get rich with crypto, and many
scams lure people into highly speculative and risky ways to make money. Mining and
staking are two forms of passive income that can also appeal to risk-aware investors.
Let’s explore these two options.
 Mining  involves using computational power to validate transactions on a block-
chain network. This approach is also called a Proof-of-Work (PoW) consensus mecha-
nism. If the machines in your mining farms solve a complex mathematical problem,
you receive some cryptocurrency. While it can be lucrative, mining requires significant
up-front investment in hardware and incurs ongoing electricity costs. The profitability
depends on factors such as the cryptocurrency mined, mining difficulty, and local
electricity rates.
 Staking  allows crypto holders to lock up their assets in a blockchain network to sup-
port its operations, such as validating transactions. In return, stakers earn rewards, often
as additional tokens. This method, also called the Proof-of-Stake (PoS) consensus

119 5.3 Crypto staking
mechanism, is energy-efficient compared to mining using the previously mentioned
PoW mechanism. However, it requires holding a certain minimum amount of crypto-
currency. It involves the risk of token devaluation, which can be roughly compared
with inflation: the more tokens are created, the more the worth of existing tokens will
be reduced.
 Becoming a crypto entrepreneur may sound appealing to engineers. After all, they
can use their core strengths to build a moneymaking business. However, in many
cases, a substantial up-front investment is needed. Without investment in strong hard-
ware, there’s no mining, and mining is still expensive if your hardware is in a region
with high electricity prices. Staking can also be costly, but there are still some forms in
which you can create revenue while you hold your cryptocurrency for the long term.
Let’s look at these options.
5.3.3 Affordable staking options
Staking and validation mean your cryptocurrency is used to validate network transac-
tions with a PoS consensus mechanism. A validator node is a computer on the internet
representing existing cryptocurrency stakeholders. During a transaction, validators
are chosen randomly, based on stake size or other factors. Validators confirm transac-
tions, propose blocks, and add them to the blockchain. For this service, validators
earn rewards in the form of a minimal share of the transaction.
 In this process, individual investors can generate passive income with cryptocur-
rency. They can set up a validator node to validate transactions. Being in control of a
validator often means a significant investment. To provide a validator for Ethereum,
you need to stake at least 32 ETH ( https:/ /ethereum.org/en/staking/ ). This is a sub-
stantial up-front investment. If ETH is priced above $3,000, the initial investment
exceeds $100,000. 
 The easier alternative is to delegate your cryptocurrency to a third-party validator.
The validator will provide you with rewards but will take a commission, reducing your
rewards compared to running your node; this approach avoids the substantial time
and financial commitments of setting up and maintaining validator hardware and
software. Hardware ledgers typically offer software to manage positions, such as Led-
ger Live or Trezor Suite. To stake your cryptocurrency on a hardware ledger, simply
follow the instructions as shown in the supplier’s software to manage your crypto
investments. Please be aware that cryptocurrency is largely unregulated, and there are
fraud risks when you stake coins. 
Are stable coins the safest way to passive income using cryptocurrency?
When considering staking rewards, some cryptocurrencies offer exceptionally high
returns. For example, networks such as Cosmos (ATOM) and Polkadot (DOT), which
act as bridges between blockchains, can provide staking rewards of up to 20%. How-
ever, calling this a guaranteed income is misleading. Tokens that provide high-stakes

120 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
So, how much can you earn through staking? One challenge is that staking rewards
vary significantly depending on transaction value. It differs from interest payments of
bonds, where there are constant interest payments. Table 5.2. shows average staking
rewards over time.