# Chapter 3 highlighted the many ratios that could be explored to assess a company’s

Chapter 3 highlighted the many ratios that could be explored to assess a company’s
performance. All of these ratios are potential candidates for ML features. Besides the
fundamentals and technical data, such as the stock price, numerous external factors,
including the country’s overall economic situation, social media sentiments, news,
weather, insider trades, and more, can also influence the stock price.
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5PriceATOM-USD
2021-01 2021-04 2021-07 2021-10 2022-01 2022-04 2022-07 2022-10 2023-01
DateClosing Price
Figure 8.6 Price development of Cosmos (ATOM) between 2021 and 2023

196 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
 If we select a minimal number of features, we risk underfitting, which occurs when
a ML algorithm fails to identify strong correlations between the features and the label.
Considering the vast number of possible features, we also risk failing due to the
opposite by overfitting the models if we add too many features. Some statisticians
often speak of the signal and the noise. Features that aren’t interesting—the noise—
frequently prevent us from seeing the factors we would need to see to predict an out-
come, the signal.
EFFORT
If we train and update multiple models regularly, we must find efficient practices to
manage them well. Models need to be versioned, and it must be possible to redeploy
every historical model if necessary. Changes in models also need to be transparent so
that we can better understand how they have evolved in retrospect.
 In addition, companies in various industries and sectors exhibit significant differ-
ences, as illustrated in chapter 3. A model that works for one industry may not be
effective in another. So, we would have to create specific models for separate indus-
tries and sectors, making the process even more complicated, as we need to maintain
many models in parallel.
 Figure 8.7 shows the MLDevOps Cycle. This picture illustrates the entire lifecycle
of model generation, encompassing data exploration and deployment options. We
collect and prepare data, and then build and validate ML models. Once validated, the
model is versioned, packaged, and deployed to a production environment. New results
are continuously collected in this operational setting, enabling us to refine our under-
standing of model performance. New data sources are identified and integrated as the
process evolves, feeding the next model development cycle.
ML
Data
Model
DEV
Extract,
Transform,
LoadValidate
Identify
New
DataPackageOPS
Deploy
Monitor
Figure 8.7 The MLDevOps Cycle, including preparation and deployment

197 8.1 From code to machine learning
In larger organizations, the efforts required to maintain models can become immense,
slowing down overall progress within the company. It’s one task to create models, but
another to maintain them to avoid chaos.
8.1.5 Narrowing the scope
A ML model that accurately forecasts all stock prices would be like the golden goose
from the fairy tale, and the universal money-making formula, of course, doesn’t exist.
Many companies successfully use ML use cases for more isolated scenarios. If you
apply your skills wisely and focus on the right goals, there are plenty of chances to pre-
dict future gains better than others. Let’s look at a narrowed use case.
 A business model describes how a company generates revenue and achieves eco-
nomic success. For example, Netflix and Spotify have subscription-based and adver-
tisement-based revenue models. The goal is to maximize the number of users who pay
a monthly subscription fee.
 We can develop specific ML models to measure success, incorporating generic eco-
nomic data, sentiments, and other data sources to predict industry outcomes. Such a
model can’t eliminate all risks, such as mismanagement or geopolitical changes, but it
can help assess possible results for a market niche.
 M L  i s  p a r t  o f  d i s c r i m i n a t i v e  m o d e l s .  W e  e x p e c t  t h e m  t o  r e t u r n  q u a n t i t a t i v e
results, such as a binary classification (e.g., “yes”, “no”, “up”, or “down”) or a num-
ber based on a regression algorithm, which forecasts the likely future share price of
an asset. Suppose a ML model recommends we sell company shares of a company
that we believe has the brightest future imaginable. The output format will always
be the same; the results won’t contain any creative analysis but will indicate buy,
sell, or hold. Traditional ML won’t explain its reasoning. The adage “Every use case
has its best-suited tool, but not every tool is suitable for every use case” applies. Dis-
criminative ML frameworks can be beneficial for use cases where no creativity is
required. If you, for instance, plan to build a robo trader to automate transactions
to trigger orders based on the data on the market, traditional ML use cases will pro-
vide the value you need. Now, it’s time to investigate a different form of AI that gen-
erates new results, which we could also call creative in some cases, addressing different
use cases.
RenTech and automated trading
If you’re interested in quantitative trading, study RenTech’s history and learn how this
company became one of the most successful hedge fund management firms. One
special lesson, which can’t be fully captured in depth in a book focused on teaching
programmers the basics of investment, is the challenges Jim Simons and his col-
leagues had to overcome to succeed.
It’s easy to imagine yourself looking at a screen and cheering that your model trades
better than the market. But you also must see the periods in which a model that just

198 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
8.2 From machine learning to generative AI
ML has a specific use case. Models trained for forecasting stock prices, as a representa-
tive of discriminative AI, can’t be used in other scenarios. In contrast to the discrimi-
native models we’ve seen, GenAI targets universal applications. It’s self-evident that an
ML model trained for different use cases, such as medical applications, can’t predict
stock prices. However, if we asked a public LLM, such as OpenAI GPT or Google Gem-
ini, any question, whether it’s about finance or other topics, in most cases, we get
results that at least sound right.
 So, what makes GenAI so different? The obvious answer is that, when examining
chat use cases, using an LLM to generate answers is an advanced natural language
processing (NLP) use case, and its purpose, techniques, and applications fundamen-
tally differ from those of a linear regression use case, which aims to predict trends in a
stock price. Traditional NLP applications can be compared with house cats, whereas
LLMs could be seen as big cats. But in that context, comparing GenAI using LLMs
and ML is like comparing cats with mice. Both are mammals; they share a commonal-
ity, just as LLMs and ML are part of analytics, but they are still distinct species.
 Conversely, we still explored the possible limitations of computer-generated mod-
els in a chaotic domain, which gives an excellent idea of what to look for when
researching a different analytical domain. GenAI, although “a different species,” is
another form of computer-generated model, and it makes sense to examine whether
the same limitations apply.
 We won’t go into the details in this book, but here’s two books that describe how
the transformer model and attention algorithms have become game changers: Genera-
tive AI in Action  by Amit Bahree (Manning, 2024; www.manning.com/books/generative -
ai-in-action ) and Introduction to Generative AI  by Numa Dhamani and Maggie Engler
(Manning, 2024; www.manning.com/books/introduction-to-generative-ai ). To sum-
marize the evolution, a paper called “Attention Is All You Need” ( https:/ /mng.bz/
Pw55 ) suggested an improvement when building text-based models. Instead of explor-
ing the relationship between every word in a sentence, the idea is to focus on the rela-
tionship between the essential words in sentences. This led to the transformer model.
This new approach allowed us to collect vast amounts of data and provides the basis
for LLMs, which are trained by millions of parameters.(continued)
made profits the weeks before suddenly makes losses. Everyone around you asks
the same question: Why? And, as can often be the case with ML, you may not have
an immediate answer.

199 8.2 From machine learning to generative AI
8.2.1 Comparing LLMs
Let’s start with an experiment. We’ll ask GPT-4o, Gemini, and Finance Chat about
investment strategies. We’ll provide the following three prompts related to investment
and compare the differences in the answers provided by the LLMs:
What is the current trend in the stock market?
Provide me with three reference examples that Warren Buffett would invest in
based on his strategy that aren’t currently in his portfolio.
Provide me with three reference examples of investments that Peter Lynch
would make based on his strategy that aren’t currently in his portfolio.
This chapter summarizes the results, highlighting that LLMs aren’t infallible. This test
run was executed in June 2024, before the market experienced some losses in August
2024, from which it largely recovered. Note that one challenge using LLMs is nonde-
terminism. Different users may receive different answers depending on the LLM they
use and the parameters they specify.
SUMMARIZING  THE ANSWERS
Although Gemini and GPT also raised concerns, all LLMs painted a positive picture of
the market. They advertised to investors to diversify their portfolios, which is standard
advice most financial advisors give. No LLM provided a strategy that would have pre-
vented us from experiencing the hiccups in August 2024. There are some investment
recommendations, such as using passive investment methods, but this advice is one of
the most common recommendations investment experts give to new investors.
 The answers to specific questions about Warren Buffett’s and Peter Lynch’s invest-
ment strategies are more conclusive. Both are investors who follow a particular
approach. Peter Lynch was a growth investor until he retired, and Warren Buffett is
known for his value investment style. Table 8.1 shows the results.
INTERPRETATION  OF RESULTS
Some magazines, such as The Economist , warned investors about a possible stock mar-
ket overvaluation in July 2024. Although we can acknowledge that LLMs can generally
detect volatility, they aren’t yet capable of providing a conclusive or detailed view of
the stock market, as a reader might expect when reading articles in the Financial
Times , Wall Street Journal , or any other newspaper, making it more sensible to consult a
professional rather than an LLM.Table 8.1 Results of prompts related to stocks
Investor GPT-4o Gemini Finance Chat
Buffett Microsoft, Costco, Visa Costco, Microsoft, Procter & 
Gamble Allegion, Danaher, Coca-Cola
Lynch Etsy, Zoom, Square Trade Desk, Etsy, Shopify Tesla, Allegion, DCP

200 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
 Regarding the investor’s comparison, GPT-4o and Finance Chat returned stocks
already in the Berkshire Hathaway portfolio ( www.cnbc.com/berkshire-hathaway-
portfolio/ ): Visa and Coca-Cola. GPT-4o and Gemini came up with the same picks for
Warren Buffett (Microsoft, Costco) twice, and had one match with Peter Lynch (Etsy).
GPT-4o picked a company, Square, that was renamed in 2021. Additionally, it chose a
company (Zoom) strongly associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Finance Chat
picked a company called Allegion twice.
 These tests highlight the risks associated with seeking investment advice. Did GPT-
4o and Gemini choose the same stock because they use the same data sources? How
old are the data sources? Why did Finance Chat pick an Irish company (Allegion)
twice? On which data were all three models trained?
8.2.2 Complementing ML with GenAI
It’s challenging to compare GenAI with traditional ML as, to some extent, they fulfill
different purposes. ML is more concise, whereas GenAI can be seen as a Swiss army
knife for creative problem-solving tasks. One way they can be used together is by using
GenAI as a research tool for ML models. The idea behind ML is to train a model that
receives data, examines specific parameters, and predicts an outcome based on histor-
ical data. One challenge is selecting the proper parameter to maintain the model.
 GenAI, a tool that provides more generic answers, can help accelerate the research
process to identify suitable features for an ML model. In short, don’t think of old-
school ML or GenAI; instead, consider using both in tandem in your explorations.
8.2.3 Challenges
Based on our small experiment and existing knowledge, we can identify the chal-
l e n g e s  w e  f a c e  w h e n  u s i n g  L L M s  f o r  i n v e s t m e n t  a d v i c e .  S o m e  a r e  c r u c i a l  t o  m a k e
informed investment decisions, determining whether we achieve gains or losses.
Hardly anyone wants to lose money because of some risky speculation that an LLM
might be right.
DATED INFORMATION
Imagine you’re seeking investment advice, and the model was trained on outdated
data. You’ll find a recent article on the internet about potential risks uncovered about
a specific asset. The LLM might not have learned about it yet.
HALLUCINATIONS
Ultimately, an LLM is a model with billions of parameters. The maintainers of LLMs
generate them by training these models on vast amounts of data sources, primarily
from the internet. While LLMs might return astute advice that could help you make
decent returns, they could also return questionable answers.
8.2.4 Final judgement on ML and GenAI
T r a d i t i o n a l  M L  i s  a l s o  r e f e r r e d  t o  a s  d i s c r i m i n a t i v e  A I .  Discriminative  means distin-
guishing or separating from others, whereas generative  aims for creative output. ML

201 8.3 Practical use of GenAI
focuses more on specific use cases to extract results from data, whereas GenAI’s appli-
cations are broader and lead to unexpected outcomes. The approach of both meth-
ods may differ, but the outcome is the same if the scope of an investment analysis is
too broad. Trusting forecasts in a highly volatile environment is a risk. Remember,
past performance isn’t indicative of future results.
 As we’ve demonstrated, both methods offer value within a narrow scope; there-
fore, let’s explore how we can use GenAI in our financial research. We’ll indicate that
GenAI can provide value in economic research when applied correctly.
8.3 Practical use of GenAI
GenAI offers various methods for searching for assets with high returns. In this sec-
tion, we list some of them. Be aware that GenAI is an evolving technology; we con-
tinue to see unexpected innovations that introduce new possibilities for investors.
Continue to explore new ways to optimize results using LLMs. We’ll introduce some
advanced use cases in chapter 9.
8.3.1 Using LLMs as research assistants
LLMs reduce the time required to perform time-intensive tasks, particularly research-
related work that necessitates exploring numerous resources to achieve results.
Instead of asking in general what the best stocks are to invest in, we can ask questions
that require an LLM to look for explicit details. One exemplary detail for a decision-
making scorecard for a purchase decision is the management performance of a com-
pany’s executive board. Using LLMs, we can generate an initial summary of a com-
pany’s leaders more quickly than if we queried each manager on LinkedIn. The same
applies to pending lawsuits, insider trades, business models, or customer segmenta-
tion. What could have taken hours to research by traditional web research, an LLM
can often provide within a few seconds. Let’s dive deeper into two use cases.
SUMMARIZING  DOCUMENTS
Investing requires extensive research and thinking. Many professional investors, such
as Warren Buffett, devote significant time to reading and gathering information about
a company. Many companies publish lengthy documents, and we can obtain tran-
scripts of various calls and presentations. Reading all of them from start to finish takes
a lot of time.
 One specific use case of LLMs is passing these documents to an LLM and asking it
to summarize them, focusing on the topics that are specifically interesting to you. For
example, a 60-page document can be summarized into a one-pager with the most
essential facts.
CODE GENERATION
This book presents a substantial amount of code for analyzing stocks. At the same
time, every interested programmer can get a lot of algorithms themselves from an
LLM. An LLM can generate substantial, meaningful code that makes programming
easier and faster, from collecting data to calculating ratios or using ML.

202 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
HIGH-LEVEL ANALYSES  OF NONFINANCIAL  RISKS
In chapter 7, we highlighted that using algorithms to assess multiple nonfinancial
risks can lead to significant efforts, as the term nonfinancial risk  can encompass a broad
range of factors that aren’t financial and therefore lack a clear definition. We can use
data to predict the impact of pandemics, wars, and natural catastrophes on individual
companies, and we’ll learn that some might be affected by others. However, detailed
assessments can lead to significant efforts. Let’s ask ourselves how accurate our analy-
sis must be. Perhaps for a private investor, a high-level overall evaluation is sufficient,
allowing us to validate the output of LLMs.
 You can submit a prompt such as “Assuming that risks can have a rating from 10
(maximum) to 0 (minimum), I would like to assess the risk of pandemics, global trade
wars, and climate change to each asset in my portfolio. Provide at least one sentence
why. If there is no way to associate the risk, a statement that you don’t have enough
data is also fine.”
 Table 8.2 is a reference result provided by GPT-4o to the author. It was transcribed
to this table; you can offer a similar portfolio analysis with a similar prompt.
Table 8.2 A reference risk assessment provided by GPT-4o (0 minimum, 10 maximum)
Company Pandemic ReasonTrade 
warReasonClimate 
changeReason
Google 2 Digital services 
thrive in pandemics.6 Global ad spend is 
exposed to geopo-
litical frictions.3 Low direct cli-
mate exposure
Pfizer 4 High initial benefit 
from COVID, less 
future upside3 Limited export vul-
nerability2 Low environmen-
tal risk overall
Ali Baba 5 Chinese consump-
tion dropped in early 
pandemics.9 Central figure in 
US-China tech 
decoupling6 Some exposure 
to carbon-inten-
sive logistics
Orsted 1 Renewable energy 
demand steady or 
rising2 Localized wind/
green projects 
limit exposure.9 Renewable 
energy play 
depends on cli-
mate policy.
CCJ 1 Uranium demand 
steady4 Export-oriented but 
essential material6 Positive expo-
sure as nuclear 
gains from cli-
mate urgency
Lyft 8 Transportation 
demand falls in 
lockdowns.3 Mainly domestic 
US service4 Some regulatory 
risk for emissions
MNMD 3 Biotech trials 
delayed during 
pandemics.1 Low global export 
relevance2 No meaningful 
climate exposure

203 8.3 Practical use of GenAI
Professional risk analysts will highlight that these assessments are vague and that orga-
nizations focusing on risk will likely achieve better results that have also been peer-
reviewed. Still, an assessment of an LLM may provide enough information for a pri-
vate investor to review their strategy. In the previous evaluation, we’ve allocated 33
points to the pandemic, 43 to the trade war, and 41 to climate change. Although these
ratings estimate an LLM, investors can discover that they may be exposed to specific
risks and act accordingly. For instance, knowing that one’s portfolio is more exposed
to, let’s say, the risks of a pandemic might lead to more cautious behavior when there
are reports that a new pandemic might come.
8.3.2 Integrating LLMs into code
LLM providers compete in the market to gain more user visibility. Some LLMs are
available in different product versions, with more limited or powerful features.
Even if the latest version of an LLM might be more dominant than others for a
while, providers regularly release new versions with new features, so any dominance
is broken soon.
 Public LLMs, such as OpenAI (GPT), Google (Gemini), or Meta (Llama), allow
prompting through an API, and we can integrate API calls to them into Python code.
We can submit a prompt and receive an answer that we can then further process. We’ll
also demonstrate how models from Hugging Face differ when downloaded to a local
machine for execution.
OPENAI
As programmers, we want to submit a prompt to an engine through an API and
retrieve the results into variables, rather than pasting requests into a chat box. List-
ing 8.8 is a sample code that allows us to do that for OpenAI GPT models. You need
an OpenAI account and an API key to run this source code. The variable system_
content  is a generic parameter of how you want GPT to answer; you can fill out here
that GPT should be concise or instruct the LLM otherwise on how to behave. Using
this simple code, we submit a prompt and evaluate the response that the LLM
returns.
 
 Uber 6 Rides fell and Eats 
rose in pandemic.5 Operates globally, 
exposed to 
trade/friction4 Transition risks 
from electrifica-
tion targets
TSM 3 Demand dropped in 
the first wave but 
rebounded fast.10 Key battleground 
in US-China chip 
conflict 5 Some energy/
water footprint 
issuesTable 8.2 A reference risk assessment provided by GPT-4o (0 minimum, 10 maximum)  (continued)
Company Pandemic ReasonTrade 
warReasonClimate 
changeReason

204 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
from openai import OpenAI
client = OpenAI(
  api_key=api_key
)
completion = client.chat.completions.create(
  model="gpt-4o",
  messages=[
    {"role": "system", "content": system_content},
    {"role": "user", "content": question}
  ]
)
Generally, the latest models yield the best results. However, in some cases, it’s more
effective to use a smaller model that generates less latency and incurs lower costs per
token. We could, therefore, use GPT-4o mini instead of GPT-4o if costs or latency are
essential for us.
 The method for the chat completions has multiple parameters ( https:/ /mng.bz/
rZDj ). As the API is being extended, exploring whether new options are available
makes sense.
 One parameter to try out is the temperature  parameter, which defines how much
less likely tokens the answer should include. The higher the temperature, the more
random the output. We can use temperature as a measure of risk and stick to 0 if we’re
risk-averse and don’t want GPT to speculate.
 Having an interface with OpenAI means we can now use Jupyter Notebooks to ask
a wide range of questions. However, as with human advisors, it often helps to seek
advice from different experts and compare their recommendations. Therefore, let’s
look at integrating Google Gemini into Python code.
GEMINI
Integrating basic Gemini API calls into Python code is relatively easier than integrat-
ing with GPT. The snippet in listing 8.9 shows how to prompt using Gemini. Again,
we can pick different model versions; we only need to send a question and evaluate
the results.
model = genai.GenerativeModel('gemini-1.5-pro-latest')
response = model.generate_content("Perform Porter 5 Forces Framework "
.                                 "analysis on NVIDIA")
print(response.candidates[0].content.parts[0])
In the code sample, we used gemini-1.5-pro-latest . Ranked by their complexity,
there are also the Ultra, Pro, Flash, and Nano models. Nano models are designed toListing 8.8 Submit a prompt via the OpenAI API
Listing 8.9 Submit a prompt via the Gemini API

205 8.3 Practical use of GenAI
be executed in environments with low computing power, such as mobile devices.
When writing this book, only a 1.5 version of Pro and Flash is available, making the
Pro model the strongest model until a new ultra version is released.
 We can also add configuration options. In listing 8.10, we limit the token of our
response and add a configuration option for temperature that defines how creative
the LLM can be.
response = model_flash.generate_content(f"Perform Porter 5 Forces"
.                                        "Framework analysis on NVIDIA",
                                        generation_config = 
genai.GenerationConfig(
                                        max_output_tokens=max_token,
                                        temperature=temperature,
                                    ))
Integrating GPT and Gemini is easy. We can explore whether integrating other LLMs
is comparable and easy. Let’s look at two more models before we explore open source
models as alternatives.
OTHER LLM S
Listing 8.11 shows the API for Claude, which hosts a series of LLMs provided by
Anthropic. In this snippet, the parameters max_tokens  and temperature  have already
been integrated. A Python programmer can incorporate and run the code into any
Python script, provided they also have a valid API Key. Observe that the parameters
are similar to those of other APIs.
client = anthropic.Anthropic(api_key=key)
message = client.messages.create(
      model="claude-3-opus-20240229",
      max_tokens=1000,
      temperature=0,
      system="You are Claude, an AI assistant.",
      messages=[
          {"role": "user", "content": question}
      ]
 print("Claude's response:", answer.content)
As shown in listing 8.12, the integration of Mistral, another LLM created by a French
company, demonstrates that integrating API calls is straightforward. It seems trivial to
integrate the code. There might be some minor differences in how the methods are
named, but essentially, for all LLMs, it’s all about selecting a model, configuring some
parameters, and sending a query with a question to the LLM
 .Listing 8.10 Submitting prompts via Gemini with parameters
Listing 8.11 Submitting prompts via the Anthropic API

206 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
model = "mistral-large-latest"
client = Mistral(api_key=api_key)
chat_response = client.chat.complete(
  model = model,
  messages = [
    {
      "role": "user",
      "content": question,
    },
  ]
)
print(chat_response.choices[0].message.content)
But all of these LLMs, even if we just provided simple snippets, have one thing in com-
mon: a developer needs to get an API key to work with it. The companies behind
these LLMs use their models to generate revenue. This means some of these LLMs are
only accessible if the entity that provides the API key pays a subscription fee.
 Additionally, all of these LLMs are hosted within the company’s infrastructure.
Suppose someone aims to create a fintech start-up that develops sophisticated invest-
ment strategies. In that case, the programmers might not like the idea that a separate
company might investigate requests on their LLMs. They would prefer to host their
LLMs in-house.
 We’ve seen that all of these providers have their API. Programmers will want one
API and use models as parameters instead. In chapter 9, we’ll explore the use of Lang-
Chain, which provides this feature to us.
FINANCE  CHAT
After demonstrating how to integrate proprietary LLMs into code, we’ll now explore
how to incorporate open source LLMs trained on finance-related use cases. Hugging
Face has become the go-to platform for hosting open source LLMs.
NOTE For engineers who have experienced the late 1990s and the battle
between open source and closed source products, the current discussion on
open source and AI often feels like a continuation of the past. Some names
have changed. It’s no longer Windows versus Linux or Bill Gates versus Linus
Torvalds. The battle is between commercial products and Hugging Face, or
Sam Altman and a group of engineers who wanted to remove him when his
authority within OpenAI was questioned.
Open source LLMs face the same opportunities and challenges as open source soft-
ware systems. While they might have less revenue than companies that license soft-
ware, they often have the support of the academic world. Advocates of open source
also claim that their ethical approach is favorable. The source code and the architec-
ture are publicly accessible, and providers of open source LLMs offer more insights
into the training process.Listing 8.12 Submitting prompts via Mistral API

207 8.3 Practical use of GenAI
From a programmer’s point of view, the most significant difference in using open
source models is that we, in the standard case, load a model onto our infrastructure
and execute inference there instead of calling an LLM hosted on a remote server. In
listing 8.13, we use the AdaptLLM/finance-chat  model, which is available on Hugging
Face ( https:/ /huggingface.co/AdaptLLM/finance-chat ). Running the source code
given here will trigger the model download onto the computer if it’s not already pres-
ent and then execute inference on the model locally. If you try out this code, be aware
that it might take some time to download the model when you call this code for the
first time.
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM
def ask_huggingface(model_name, query):
    model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_name)
    tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_name)
    
    our_system_prompt = """\nYou are a helpful, respectful and honest 
assistant. Always answer as helpfully as possible, while being safe.  Your 
answers should not include any harmful, unethical, racist, sexist, toxic, 
dangerous, or illegal content. Please ensure that your responses are 
socially unbiased and positive in nature.\n\nIf a question does not make 
any sense, or is not factually coherent, explain why instead of answering 
something not correct. If you don't know the answer to a question, please 
don't share false information.\n"""
    prompt = f"<s>[INST] <<SYS>>{our_system_prompt}<</SYS>>"
             f"\n\n{query} [/INST]"
    inputs = tokenizer(prompt, return_tensors="pt", 
                       add_special_tokens=False).input_ids.to(model.device)
    outputs = model.generate(input_ids=inputs, max_length=4096)[0]
    
    answer_start = int(inputs.shape[-1])
    pred = tokenizer.decode(outputs[answer_start:], skip_special_tokens=True)
    return pred  Finance-related LLMs
Some LLMs are explicitly trained for specific domains. Bloomberg GPT is a known ref-
erence for an LLM trained with finance data. As Bloomberg GPT is a commercial LLM,
it’s not included in this investigation.
Another option to enhance financial knowledge in data is fine-tuning pretrained mod-
els using financial data. For example, a ML engineer could collect transcripts of earn-
ings calls, where executives discuss a company’s financial results and train existing
LLMs with them. As a result, the model would keep what it already knows and add
new knowledge. We’ll explore that in chapter 9.
Listing 8.13 Executing prompt with open source models

208 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
question = "What is the current trend in the stock market?"
model = "AdaptLLM/finance-chat"
response = ask_huggingface(model,  question)
Using Hugging Face, we can avoid the cost of commercial LLMs. But there is a down-
side to this. If we run a model locally, we first need the necessary hardware to support
it. This includes the required disk space and the processors to execute the model.
 Inference may take some time, depending on the local machine’s hardware.
Expect a few minutes, depending on the number of GPUs you provide to the model.
Remember that you may need to allocate time to install additional Python libraries.
8.4 Prompt engineering
Many YouTube videos teach interested followers how to optimize prompts. What
sounds like a complex discipline, especially the term engineering , may make it sound
sophisticated. Still, it has a simple problem statement: don’t just ponder what to ask,
but also how. The better you can explain what you want and the more context you can
provide, the better answers you’ll get. Nobody needs an engineering degree to apply
prompt engineering, but it’s perhaps one of the biggest low-hanging fruits for achiev-
ing better results using AI. Let’s kick off prompts by defining an investor’s profile.
8.4.1 An investor’s profile
Imagine a random person approaches a human financial advisor with a generic ques-
tion, such as “Please provide me with a good portfolio.” A professional investment
expert wouldn’t recommend anything without knowing more about their client.
Using well-prepared questions, good advisors guide their clients to share more about
their risk tolerance or investment goals.
 Like a human financial advisor, an LLM will provide more sophisticated answers if
given more context. The following question is a first improvement of the previous ref-
erence question: 
I am a risk-averse investor who wants to invest in stocks. I currently have $100,000
available for investment. My goal is to maximize my passive income. I want to invest
exclusively in companies in the Information Technology sector. Can you provide me
with a reference portfolio with maximized returns and minimized risks?
Once the input is sent to an LLM, it will be tokenized. The LLM will identify specific
tokens as keywords. In our example, these terms will include risk-averse  investor , stocks ,
the information technology sector , maximizing returns , and minimizing risks . The more we
integrate domain-specific language, the better answers we might receive, as the high-
quality sources of an LLM upon which it was trained were provided by domain experts
who used their domain-specific language.
TIP Reading the investment sections of newspapers, such as The Financial
Times  or The Wall Street Journal , and learning the meaning of specific terms can

209 8.4 Prompt engineering
be a simple yet powerful way to improve query results. The next time, don’t
wonder why the stock market went down or up; ask why it “plummeted” or
“soared.”
If you start investing, you’ll have many research questions about companies or invest-
ment opportunities. Likely, you don’t want to repeat yourself by adding all the context
to each question you have.
 A good human advisor will collect notes about you. However, as time passes, they
may forget the details. One day, they become excited about a fantastic high-growth
start-up, only to realize too late that this opportunity doesn’t align with a client’s risk
profile. Another time, they suggest an international exchange-traded fund (ETF), for-
getting it triggers withholding tax issues based on the client’s residency. Mistakes like
these can cost you money.
 This is where LLMs have a clear edge: they don’t forget. Once you provide a con-
text, it remains consistent across all interactions—unless you explicitly remove or
modify it. Unlike human advisors, who might overlook details, an AI will continuously
apply your parameters, ensuring that every recommendation strictly adheres to your
preferences.
 Establishing context is the first and most crucial step in using AI for financial
guidance. This context defines the rules your AI assistant will follow when analyzing
investments. Let’s examine some parameters and explore how we can adjust our
conversation. The following can be viewed as a template, combined into a large
chunk of text, and provided to an LLM as general knowledge about you.
GOALS
Provide goals that are as precise as possible. What are you in for? Most likely, it’s not
just because a friend told you to explore stocks. Do you aim to become a brilliant out-
lier in the investment world—the one person who is smarter than everyone else and
who will beat the market? Or, do you have a more modest goal to grow patiently and
earn enough money to live off a reasonable passive income each year?
 Many financial advisors argue that you should quantify your goals. How much
money do you aim for? Do you have a number in your head? This brings us to our
next question: What are you willing to risk to fulfill your goals?
RISK PREFERENCE
Imagine you’ve made a risky deal. If all goes well, you might be up 30%. If all goes
bad, you might lose a lot of money. Some people go to bed and sleep like babies. Oth-
ers toss and turn, worrying about possible losses.
 You don’t gain anything by claiming to be bolder than you are. After all, many
investors in the past were successful because they were cautious.
 Knowing your risk preference requires a lot of self-awareness. The more you
understand yourself, the more precise you can be in your persona.

210 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
EXPERIENCE
Warren Buffett mentioned one golden rule: invest only in what you understand—add-
ing details about what you know can be low-hanging fruit in your investment portfolio.
Sentences such as “I am a programmer, and I work in the financial services industry”
can help. You can even mention your former and current employers or clients with
whom you have a strong relationship.
 Additionally, specify which assets you have experience with. You can also exclude
certain assets if you prefer. Cryptocurrency is a good example of a polarizing asset. If
you want or don’t want crypto in your portfolio, mention it.
TAX CONSIDERATIONS
If you tell an LLM your citizenship and residency, it can provide advice on details that
tax consultants typically charge for. Don’t hesitate to add a sentence like this: “I am a
citizen of Country X, and my tax residency is in Country Y, so I need a portfolio that
minimizes tax-related expenses.” Remember that LLMs can hallucinate, and cross-
checking tax advice from an LLM with a human advisor is always a good idea.
ETHICAL  OR PERSONAL  PREFERENCES
Some investors keep their religious, ethical, and political views out of investing. For
others, it might be one of the most critical aspects in their strategy. Would you feel
uncomfortable investing in companies that don’t align with your values? No matter
what you care for—climate change, politics, abortion laws, animal rights, or some-
thing else—mention it; after all, it’s your money.
 You can also engineer your prompts to adjust the style of the answer. Some prefer a
detailed explanation, while others appreciate a concise yet direct response. Let’s craft
a reference persona:
“I have a computer science background. I have 
worked on various digital transformation projects 
for multiple companies. I understand well how AI 
can change companies' businesses. I am looking 
for companies' stocks that might be transformed 
through AI but have not yet been overrun by 
investors.                                           
I aim to achieve financial independence within the 
next five years. I have approximately 500,000 USD 
available for investment. I want to be able to 
calculate the money I make passively, considering 
the average yield of my assets (interest, staking 
rewards, and dividends).                             
I mainly hold stocks and ETFs. I also have bonds 
and crypto. I want to keep some amount in index 
funds.                                             
I am interested in the future of autonomous 
driving and the monetization of climate change Background
Experience

211 8.4 Prompt engineering
mitigation. I also believe in the increasing demand 
for reliable, nonvolatile energy sources, such as 
nuclear energy, driven by the growing need for 
sustainable energy solutions. I am also open to 
alternative sources of energy, including atomic 
energy.                                            
I use Interactive Broker and Alpaca as brokers. 
I use cold wallets to store cryptocurrency.        
I have uploaded a text file with all the stocks 
I hold. It is called stocks.txt and shall be 
included in the research if needed.                
I can take risks if decisions have been thoroughly 
researched. If the valuation of the asset is 
temporarily lower, I have no problem as long as 
I see long-term potential. I am okay with shorting 
some positions, but I prefer long-term quality 
investing. I do not do day trading.                    
I want to diversify. Diversification also includes 
assets worldwide, as I see political risks in the US. 
Otherwise, I am fine with holding most assets in the 
US market.                                             
I am a US American citizen. My tax residency is in 
the UK. I want to minimize the taxes I have to pay.  
I do not like to invest in the tobacco industry 
and companies that ignore animal rights.  
8.4.2 Using prompts to find companies to invest in
Growth investors often seek small-cap companies with a high probability of experienc-
ing a substantial revenue increase over the years. So, can we find these companies
using prompts to an LLM? We need to define in detail what we’re looking for. Let’s do
this with a reference example. Netflix’s business model is quite simple, as shown in
Figure 8.8: the more viewers subscribe to Netflix monthly, the more earnings the com-
pany will make. If we predict that the revenues from subscriptions will exceed their
expenses, Netflix will be profitable. If these profits continue to increase, the share
price will likely rise.
 Predicting Netflix’s costs will likely be challenging, as it requires a deep under-
standing of internal filming projects and licensing negotiations, to which we don’t
have access (unless we work for Netflix). However, we can estimate subscriber growth
using LLMs.
 What can influence subscriber numbers? We must determine what attracts custom-
ers to Netflix and keeps them engaged. For instance, customers sometimes feel locked
in. Many shows in the program are on a customer’s to-do list, or the kids in the family
account become so accustomed to this service that a parent can’t simply cancel theExperience
Risk
Taxes
Ethics

212 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
subscription without risking a family crisis. And often, because you get a report on
what your kid watches, some parents don’t want to miss unique features to monitor
their kids’ TV habits. Such a business with a constant growth scenario and a vendor
lock, or economic moat to use a term more frequently used among investments,
sounds like a paradise for investors. Examining the development of stock prices, par-
ticularly after the transition from mailing DVDs to streaming services, is compelling.
Python or chatbots
Some users experimenting with LLM chatbots may notice they are invaluable when
investigating assets. Some chatbots offer additional research options after users
submit prompts. It’s fair to ask if we still need Python to get results. Chapter 9 will
provide more details on this topic. For now, let’s sum up what standalone chatbots
don’t resolve.
In most cases, the chatbot provider won’t provide Retrieval-Augmented Generations
(RAGs) with vectorized data specific to finance use cases. Additionally, as LLMs may
overlook data from smaller and less well-known companies, they may occasionally
miss crucial details. Lastly, regardless of which provider you choose, the results will
always be stored on the provider’s side, and you’ll face challenges in keeping track
of resources across different platforms.
Therefore, using chatbots can help us answer questions. If we want to work with more
LLMs and add specific additional data, though, we might still need to use some code
to accomplish this. In chapter 9, we’ll demonstrate how to use AI agents.
Costs Revenues
Subscription payments
Movie production costsLicensing costs
Figure 8.8 A highly simplified model reduced to the most central figures that Netflix is 
profitable if revenues from paying subscribers exceed production and licensing costs. 
While, of course, many more numbers exist that influence accounting sheets, such 
illustrations help us to extract these numbers that can be most decisive about a specific 
company’s long-term success.

213 Summary
Although the business model may be compelling, Netflix may no longer be in a signif-
icant growth phase. But what if we described what made Netflix successful in a prompt
and see if we could find a similar company?
 The more context and details we provide about how we want an LLM to answer,
the more specific responses we can get. Let’s review a checklist to see if our prompt
can be improved.
Are we specific enough?  We can define what we want in detail. We can also ask
about register in answers (from more formal to less formal). Have we listed the
details that matter to us?
Do we express ourselves succinctly?  Imprecise and unnecessarily long phrases might
reduce efficiency.
Can we supply examples in the input?  One way to improve answers is by providing
examples of what we seek. We might look for companies like ones we know well
and where we believe they will be successful.
L e t ’ s  f o r m u l a t e  a  p r o m p t  t o  f i n d  c o m p a n i e s  l i k e  N e t f l i x .  W e  c a n  i n v o k e  d i f f e r e n t
LLMs to compare results:
I want to find companies with a similar outlook to Netflix’s in the early years. I want
to buy low and sell at a high price in some years. These companies will be able to
scale globally, offer a B2C subscription model, and possess a strong economic moat.
These companies will have room to grow and already be listed on the stock exchange.
Please give me three examples and the reasons why you chose them.
ChatGPT returned Duolingo and Bumble as results, which some investors on Seeking
Alpha saw as a risky investment. Be aware that an LLM’s recommendations are just an
entry point for further research. Investing in them without your due diligence is risky.
You must determine whether the answers provided by the LLMs are sensible. 
Summary
We can integrate ML algorithms as code snippets into web notebooks to aid us
in financial research, such as forecasting stock price developments, including
uptrends.
Unsupervised learning may help us identify outliers, which, in the investment
scenario, could be companies that perform differently from the rest and pres-
ent an investment opportunity.
We can use unsupervised learning to find potential labels for supervised learn-
ing algorithms.
Supervised learning can help us forecast a company’s future success by analyz-
ing its historical data.
Successfully applying supervised learning algorithms can require a high level of
technical expertise, encompassing everything from collecting data from multi-
ple sources to processing algorithms at scale.

214 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
As the market is affected by many factors (fundamental data, technical data, or
other data unrelated to a specific company), most models risk being either
overfitted or underfitted.
The efficient market theory suggests that for most assets, the market price accu-
rately reflects the asset’s intrinsic value.
The random market theory and the allegory of Mr. Market suggest that a mar-
ket is unpredictable. This makes ML models challenging.
Technological and social changes affect investment strategies. For example, ESG
regulations are more important to investors today than they were in the past.
Seasonal and economic trends impact the performance of stocks and must be
considered in ML models.
Different accounting practices within companies make it more difficult to com-
pare companies.
To integrate ML, we must invest considerable effort in identifying specific
industry patterns and retraining models. Only a fraction of hedge funds run
largely successful ML use cases.
LLMs are game-changers in natural language processing (NLP). They employ
a new paradigm called the attention mechanism, which focuses solely on the
relationship between keywords. This makes it possible to create models
trained on billions of parameters and serve as chatbots for users to address
generic topics.
LLMs can be trained to answer specific questions related to topics, including
finance and investment.
LLMs are also excellent for providing an overview of how specific nonfinancial
risks can impact individual companies. Just be aware that you might have to
review the output due to possible hallucinations.
Users can choose from various LLMs, and an API for sending queries to an
LLM is easy to integrate into Python code. In most cases, all users require an
API key to authenticate against the provider and obtain authorization to pro-
cess LLM inference on the LLM provider’s infrastructure.
Many LLMs come in versions that differ in complexity. Some may require a paid
subscription, while others are designed for environments with fewer computing
resources, such as mobile phones.
We can classify LLMs as open source or proprietary. We can download models
of open source LLMs to a compute node or local workstation to run the infer-
ence there. Proprietary LLMs are executed on the provider’s infrastructure.
AI ethics professionals are concerned about proprietary LLMs, as providers
could misuse the information provided to them through users’ questions. Addi-
tionally, the transparency of how these providers collect information is a signifi-
cant ethical concern.

215 Summary
Whether an LLM is open source or proprietary, it can provide us with invest-
ment ideas. Betting on LLM investment advice without further investigation is
highly speculative.
LLMs are great for tasks that require them to act like research assistants. When
investors require less time for research, they can devote more attention to deci-
sion-making processes.
The code generation capabilities of LLMs enable programmers to write more
efficient code and analyze investments in various scenarios using programming
languages such as Python.
Although we can use LLMs to generate investment ideas, their core asset is
helping us with due diligence on existing ideas, specifically when we need to
find details on possible investments to create a personal scorecard for informed
purchase decisions.
Although LLMs help us speed up finance research tasks, they occasionally make
mistakes and provide false information, often called hallucinations.
The question isn’t whether to use discriminative AI (traditional ML) or GenAI;
it’s rather how to pragmatically use what’s there for specific scenarios and com-
bine the possibilities of each technology.
Prompt engineering is a discipline that enhances the output of LLMs by
enabling users to ask more effective questions. It provides ways to pass more
details, reference examples, and additional context for a request to an LLM.
Prompt engineering can’t replace common wisdom, as it depends on us to clar-
ify what we want to know to avoid generic questions in an LLM.
Creating an investor profile that includes information such as goals, risk toler-
ance, and tax residency can help an LLM provide more refined answers.
Be as specific as possible and give as much context as possible when submitting
prompts. It helps to provide reference examples.

216AI agents