# Chapter 8 concluded that large language models (LLMs) are powerful research

Chapter 8 concluded that large language models (LLMs) are powerful research
assistants who can significantly streamline asset analysis. We learned the fundamen-
tals, including the distinction between discriminative and generative AI (GenAI),
as well as how to trigger LLM prompts effectively.
 Chapter 9 focuses first on the advanced application of LLMs without frame-
works to build AI agents. We’ll first show scenarios for integrating LLM into work-
flows. We’ll create a prompt repository and design a first workflow to bring more
structure to AI-augmented research. Additionally, we’ll demonstrate how to export
our findings to Notion, a modern note-taking application that helps organize and
structure research efficiently.
 In the second part of this chapter, we’ll integrate frameworks to build AI agents.
We’ll show how to use them and how much work can be simplified. We’ll introduceThis chapter covers
Building AI agents for structured research
Using LangChain to build AI agents
Reusing strong prompts for comparable research
Exporting the results of your study to Notion

217 9.1 Requirements
what is possible in a no-code framework using the platform n8n. Lastly, we’ll focus on
LangChain, which allows us to code logic in Python. Let’s get started.
9.1 Requirements
In chapter 8, we used one-shot prompting to query LLMs. In simplified terms, this is
submitting a single prompt to an LLM for a single response. Now, imagine that you
get access to a human expert, and you’re allowed to ask only one question. This sce-
nario is common; consider a press conference where a politician responds to the
press’s inquiries. You might not get the desired answers if your question is poorly for-
mulated. Compare a single-question, single-answer scenario to the next stage of com-
munication. Imagine being able to interview that expert and engage in a dialogue.
Based on past answers, you can ask more directed questions.
9.1.1 Successful communication
We can create parallels to AI. In addition to asking one-shot questions for basic sce-
narios, we can develop a refined strategy for more complex settings. Before we
delve into the details, let’s consider what is required for successful communication
in this analogy.
MEMORY
One difference between conversing with AI and human interaction is the reflection of
past communication. If Rajesh and Peter discuss a complex topic and gain new
insights from that discussion, both can use what they have learned in upcoming talks.
At the current stage of development, LLMs don’t gain additional insights from inter-
action with users.
NOTE In the background, the developers of LLMs will undoubtedly analyze
conversations between LLMs and users to use the insights gained in build-
ing new models. However, this isn’t the same as humans learning from sin-
gle discussions.
One practical approach is to use Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), which
enhances LLMs by incorporating relevant external context into their input. In other
words, we create additional memory for an LLM by adding specific information that it
can use when crafting answers.
LANGUAGE  SKILLS
Imagine being locked in the Vatican Library with books that have been kept secret for
centuries. These books may contain fascinating historical insights. You’re the first lay-
person to study them, but there’s one catch: they are all written in ancient languages
that you don’t understand. We may need assistance accessing these sources, such as
translation apps or expert scholars.
 LLMs are trained on massive amounts of data. Data that was out of scope during
training is inaccessible to an LLM in the same way that we would never learn to speak
a language such as Latin. In both scenarios, the LLM and the human could learn new

218 CHAPTER  9AI agents
capabilities, but training new LLM models and learning Latin takes time. As we can
use external help, the same thing applies to LLMs. One way to provide LLMs with
access to information unavailable during training is to include this information
during prompting.
 We already mentioned that we can provide access to databases to address the chal-
lenge of integrating supplemental data and ensure that LLMs get access to other
sources. In addition to the obvious candidate of a plain web search as an external data
source, we can also incorporate APIs from various data providers, allowing an AI agent
to retrieve mailbox content or chat history from messengers. We can task AI agents
with parsing these sources, commonly by using API calls that include access tokens,
and providing this information to LLMs.
STRATEGY
Imagine gathering many brilliant minds in one room to solve a single complex prob-
lem. Sometimes, these high-octane brains speculate about great ideas without strategy
or moderation, but fail to deliver a tangible solution. Every coordinated moderate
team with a goal will likely outperform a rudderless team of geniuses.
 When many creative individuals are involved, we often need a leader who can
effectively channel their collective creativity and inspire them to work together. Jim
Simons created one of the most successful investment funds. What people admire
about him is that he was able to assemble a team of brilliant minds recruited from Ivy
League universities. Everyone reading books about him will understand that coordi-
nating the geniuses working with him often seemed more difficult than coming up
with the math to harvest significant returns. However, once his sharp thinkers were
aligned, the funds created by Renaissance Technologies outperformed the market.
 Anyone with experience with academic structures will also understand that every
scientific journal will downgrade papers without a peer review. Even the brightest sci-
entists need feedback, and the challenge is often not coming up with an idea but
working out the nitty-gritty details in a paper.
 What works for humans is also valid for AI. We can employ multiple specialized
LLMs and isolate them for specific tasks. One LLM generates an analysis, and the sec-
ond performs a peer review. We can define all the logic so that AI works like an
orchestra, where every LLM plays its part to achieve a unified result.
9.1.2 Agentic design patterns
Using agentic design patterns is an approach to structuring AI research. Deep-
Learning.AI ( https:/ /mng.bz/V9Qx ) introduced four patterns, which we’ll explore
in detail:
Reflection
Tool use
Planning
Multi-agent collaboration

219 9.1 Requirements
REFLECTION
The reflection pattern enables agents to iteratively improve their performance by ana-
lyzing past actions and adjusting their strategies based on the feedback received. This
pattern encourages self-evaluation: after each task, the agent collects outcome data
and measures performance against predefined goals or metrics. Through repeated
feedback loops, the agent identifies inefficiencies, uncovers patterns, and refines its
decision-making over time.
 Consider a trading bot as an example. Throughout the trading day, it follows
predefined strategies to execute trades. At market close, the bot aggregates key per-
formance indicators—such as profitability, risk exposure, and execution accuracy—
and evaluates which strategies underperformed or missed critical signals. Based on
these insights, it revises its approach for the next trading session. It may tighten risk
thresholds, deprioritize low-yield strategies, or fine-tune execution timing. This
continuous cycle of action, evaluation, and adaptation lies at the heart of the reflec-
tion pattern.
TOOL USE
The tool use pattern empowers agents by integrating external tools, libraries, or APIs
to expand their functional range. Rather than relying solely on internal logic, agents
can delegate specific tasks to specialized systems, such as data retrieval, transforma-
tion, or advanced computations.
 This pattern mirrors how humans use calculators or web services to solve domain-
specific problems efficiently. An AI agent may call a stock price API to retrieve real-
time data or invoke a sentiment analysis tool to interpret market news. When needed,
the agent autonomously identifies which tool to activate, orchestrates the calls, and
integrates the results into its broader decision-making process.
 By outsourcing complex subtasks to purpose-built tools, agents remain lightweight
and modular, enabling them to tackle diverse challenges without reinventing the
wheel. Let’s explore how to coordinate these subtasks.
PLANNING
The planning pattern enables agents to construct and execute multistep strategies to
accomplish complex goals. It introduces dynamic adaptability by allowing agents to
generate workflows in real time based on current objectives, available resources, and
operational constraints.
 In this approach, the agent begins by defining the end goal. It then evaluates the
current environment, identifying constraints, dependencies, and tools. If a preferred
resource is unavailable, the agent seeks alternatives. Based on this assessment, it con-
structs a sequence of actions that takes dependencies into account and executes the
plan step-by-step, continuously monitoring outcomes.
 Consider an AI-driven stock advisory system that evaluates hundreds of compa-
nies daily. To identify promising investments, it dynamically builds a research work-
flow that gathers financial data, scans news articles, processes sentiment data, and

220 CHAPTER  9AI agents
ranks opportunities. If a company’s profile changes due to a significant earnings
surprise, the agent adapts its plan, reprioritizing the analysis and sending timely
alerts.
 The planning pattern emphasizes structure with flexibility, turning reactive agents
into proactive strategists. Let’s see how multiple agents can coordinate work.
MULTI-AGENT  PATTERN
The multi-agent pattern coordinates multiple specialized agents to solve complex
tasks collaboratively. This design emphasizes parallelism, specialization, and delegated
reasoning, where each agent contributes a unique perspective or capability, thereby
enhancing overall system performance. An orchestrator or moderator coordinates the
overall process, ensuring that agents operate in sync and that their outputs are inte-
grated effectively.
 Imagine a stock buy decision modeled as a deliberative process, similar to a court-
room. One agent is the optimist, advocating for the purchase by analyzing growth
potential, profitability, and momentum. A second agent acts as the skeptic, focusing
on downside risks, macroeconomic headwinds, or signs of overvaluation. A third neu-
tral agent acts as the adjudicator. It reviews the arguments from both sides, weighs
their merit, and synthesizes a final investment recommendation. This pattern mirrors
expert panels in human decision-making, promoting robustness through diverse per-
spectives and modular task handling.
A REFERENCE  WORKFLOW
To illustrate everything we learned so far in one reference case for AI agents, let’s cre-
ate a reference case for investment analysis. Such a workflow is shown in figure 9.1.
 In the first stage, a workflow needs to be triggered. Let’s consider some possibilities:
Scheduled event —Every Monday morning, a time-based job scheduler triggers a
prompt submission querying about events from the last week that could have
affected the positions of the user’s investment portfolio.
User query —A user would like to reassess the risks of his portfolio and submits a
prompt to identify possible assets that would be more affected by a political cri-
sis than others. We can feed AI agents from common messaging apps. You can
therefore prompt by typing into WhatsApp, Signal, Telegram, or whatever mes-
senger you prefer.
Alert —A predefined alert triggers a workflow when the market moves vigorously
in a direction, prompting specific questions about market activity and its poten-
tial effect on the user’s portfolio.
An orchestrator starts with a retrieval process. In figure 9.1 we show one workflow.
Based on the query, the agent is, of course, not limited to one workflow alone. The
first step is the retrieval of information. AI engineers train each LLM model version
with data up to a specific moment in time. Once they release the model, they start work-
ing on new models, but likely won’t touch existing models anymore. RAG provides

221 9.1 Requirements
additional data to LLMs, bridging the gap between the model’s release and the
prompt’s submission. For this use case, we defined three categories:
RAG databases —Additional jobs collect data from different sources and provide
this data in a vector database, which allows a workflow to supply this additional
data to the generation workflow with LLMs. We need to be aware that we likely
have to manage additional components that will require some maintenance.
Data ingestion jobs will collect data from different sources to put them into a
RAG database.
Web searches —AI agents commonly provide a standardized interface to search
engines so that they can use the content provided from search engines for the
generation of responses.
Model context protocols (MCPs) —An MCP is a new interface that allows AI agents
to connect to data sources and collect data from data sources in a standardized
format. We can see them as APIs designed explicitly for LLMs. If we need to get,
for instance, the latest share price of a stock for a response, an LLM can query
this information while it generates an answer. One significant advantage overUser
Event
(scheduled/alert)
External data sourcesData IngestOrchestrator
Web SearchRetrieval Generation Review
MailLLM LLM
RAG
DBMCP
Data
ProviderLLM
DocDBMessenger
Output AI agentLLMs
Input
Additional data sources
Figure 9.1 A reference workflow for an AI agent

222 CHAPTER  9AI agents
RAG databases is that the more MCPs are available to us, the less we need to
maintain jobs that aggregate the data for ourselves.
Once we have the data retrieved, we need to start with the generation of responses.
We can consider using multiple LLMs to generate answers. Here, we have the follow-
ing options:
We can provide different LLMs with the same prompts.  As different LLMs have been
trained in different ways and with different data, we can ask LLMs the same
prompts to find out if LLMs come back with different insights.
We can provide different LLMs with different prompts.  We can ask each LLM a spe-
cific question. In investment analysis, one LLM can look for bullish scenarios,
and the other one for bearish ones.
We can, of course, mix approaches.  The more we prompt, the more results we get.
One reason to reduce the number of prompts is the cost-effectiveness, as each
generation of results incurs a cost.
The standard “RAG only approach” is to augment the sources and collect results with
one LLM. However, with multiple LLMs, we can also employ an additional step to
review all results generated by multiple LLMs in another stage with a separate LLM.
Lastly, we need to output the results. We can store all results in a database, such as
Notion, as we’ve shown in chapter 8, or any other channel we like to use.
 We can map all stages to agentic design patterns and reflect on the results we gen-
erated. We use various tools to collect additional data for LLMs, plan our execution,
and adjust workflows as needed, employing different LLMs.
9.2 Agentic workflows without frameworks
Let’s show how we can facilitate agentic workflows without specialized frameworks. We
use a data science notebook for ad hoc research. We aim to automate and approach
our research in a more structured manner. Let’s focus on three things to make our
work more reusable:
Create a repository of reusable prompts.
Connect to different LLMs.
Export results.
One goal is to keep everything as simple as possible. Each chapter features full-func-
tioning code that is downloadable from the publisher’s website. You’ll also find the
code snippets for calling LLMs outlined in chapter 8 of the notebook, which is refer-
enced in chapter 9. Let’s get started.
9.2.1 Prompt repository
By continually analyzing companies, we can develop reusable prompts that can be
applied to multiple scenarios. For example, we can ask an LLM about Apple’s perfor-
mance parameters. We can reuse that prompt for Alphabet or Amazon as well. In

223 9.2 Agentic workflows without frameworks
chapter 8, we learned how to optimize prompts. We can update and refine existing
prompts, mapping them to various scenarios.
 We can also store prompts in a database to reuse them. Let’s explore the simplest
possible database structure:
ID—The ID identifies our prompt. Examples of IDs could be porter_5_forces_
framework or swot_analysis. The IDs tell us what the prompt is about.
Prompt —The prompt contains the text that is precise enough to elicit the
expected answer from the LLM. Take your time to refine the questions, and
improve them if the LLMs don’t provide the answers you desire. You can also
use placeholders in the text that get replaced later.
As every fan of The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy  knows, asking the right question isn’t
always trivial. The key is to build up a solid repository and refine it as needed. For
example, this is an elementary prompt: 
As an investor, I’m looking at the company {company} . Provide a Boston Consulting
Group (BCG) Framework analysis. Tell me which quadrant the company is in.
The identifier company, enclosed in curly brackets, is a variable that needs to be defined
so that we can fill in the variable content into the string using a Python f-string. Take
your time to refine and extend this prompt as needed to add more context. We stick to
a simple prompt for teaching purposes.
 Each prompt can have multiple contexts. For example, the prompt above may be
helpful if we’re looking for income or growth stocks. It’s a generic prompt that helps
explore new companies. If we already know the company well, asking an LLM about
the quadrant of the BCG framework for a company no longer adds value.
 If we keep a vast number of prompts in a database, we can tag them with a context
that allows us to find them more easily later. You might reuse prompts based on indus-
tries or sectors. In chapter 11, we’ll examine catalysts, which are events that can lead
to a significant change in share prices. Some prompts might be reusable for specific
catalysts, such as earnings calls. The more specific a prompt gets—and remember, the
more specific we ask, the more particular answers we get—the fewer scenarios we can
use these prompts in.
 If we kept a separate table to store tags, we could create an n:m relation in the
table. A tag can be associated with multiple prompts, and a prompt can have multi-
ple tags.
 If we now want to store prompts and tags in database tables, we can use create
table  statements, as shown in listing 9.1. We stripped these tables to the simplest form
possible. This way, you can always fetch prompts from your local database to reuse
them for different scenarios. Remember that you need a SQL console connected to a
database to execute the Data Definition Language (DDL) statements. For exploratory
purposes, SQLite is more than sufficient.
 

224 CHAPTER  9AI agents
create table prompt
(
    id     TEXT primary key,
    prompt TEXT not null
);
create table main.tag
(
    tag_name  TEXT not null,
    prompt_id TEXT not null
);
We can use these tables in an interactive research scenario. We have our Jupyter Note-
book open in our development environment. We might decide to investigate a spe-
cific stock, let’s say, Apple. Later, we investigate alternative stocks, such as Alphabet. If
we have prompts in our database, we can always reload the text of the prompts to send
them to the LLMs.
 Having that, we can always fetch prompts and send them to an LLM—how we
send prompts to an LLM we’ve shown in the chapter before—and we’ll get many
answers. We need to store this information in a secure location. Let’s explore how
we can do that.
9.2.2 Export results
Someone who has worked with various LLM chatbots may be familiar with this situa-
tion. You’re using multiple LLMs. At some point, all the prompts and answers are dis-
persed on many platforms. Various questions on different topics are often intermixed,
making it challenging to find the past results you want to look up immediately.
 One way to prevent that is to store the output in a central repository. In chapter 6,
we used Google Sheets to monitor our portfolio. For our research, we use a structured
note-taking app.
 Notion is a professional note-taking app that enables you to create journals with
multiple pages for notes on a single topic, such as investment research. You can filter
these notes efficiently by tags and sort them by properties such as last edited time or
creation date.
 Figure 9.2 shows a Notion journal in which we made two portfolios. At the top, we
have a unique ID in the URL. This URL contains an identifier: 1a9bc3d9e2cd809-
ca869f99516383ccc. Creating your notebook with the journal will assign a unique
identifier to each page in Python, and you’ll see it in the URL the moment you share
the notebook via the web.
 Let’s learn how to export content to Notion. First, we need a title for the note. The
screenshot displays reference entries, such as INVZ—Initial Investment Thesis. Notion
needs a dictionary structure with a title to create a title page. The following method
contains a basic template. We pass the title in string form as a method parameter.Listing 9.1 DDL Scripts for creating a prompt repository

225 9.2 Agentic workflows without frameworks
Then, we insert the title as a value for the property content below the property text.
We also add it as a value for the property plain_text :
def get_title_property(title: str):
    return {'Name': {'id': 'title',
  'type': 'title',
  'title': [{'type': 'text',
    'text': {'content': title, 'link': None},
    'annotations': {'bold': False,
     'italic': False,
     'strikethrough': False,
     'underline': False,
     'code': False,
     'color': 'default'},
    'plain_text': title,
    'href': None}]}}
With the title  property, we can create pages. As shown in the following code, we trig-
ger a REST call and pass the title  property as a parameter. We receive a return code
and validate that the call has returned a status code of 200, indicating that everything
was successful. The parameter DATABASE_ID  is the unique ID that we collect through
the URL, as described at the beginning of this section.
Figure 9.2 A Notion journal with some reference entries. You can use Notion as a unified storage for all responses 
from multiple LLMs.

226 CHAPTER  9AI agents
def create_page(title_properties: dict) -> str:
    create_url = "https://api.notion.com/v1/pages"
    payload = {"parent": {"database_id": DATABASE_ID}, 
               "properties": title_properties}
    res = requests.post(create_url, headers=headers, json=payload)
    if res.status_code == 200:
        print(f"{res.status_code}: Page created successfully")
    else:
        print(f"{res.status_code}: Error during page creation")
    return res.json()["id"]
The result is a property ID. This ID refers to the newly created page. With that, we
have a new page that we can identify, so we can write content on that page, as shown in
the following code. Again, this is done via REST API, and we insert data through a
JSON-compatible dictionary structure.
def write_to_page(page_block_id: str, data: dict) -> bool:
    edit_url = f"https://api.notion.com/v1/blocks/{page_block_id}/children"
    res = requests.patch(edit_url, headers=headers, json=data)
    if res.status_code != 200:
        print(f"{res.status_code}: Error during page editing")
        return False
    return True
When writing to Notion, it’s essential to note that we can only write up to 2,000 char-
acters simultaneously. For this reason, we must first break down the text into parts to
write a comprehensive answer. The following method shows this. If a write operation
fails, we interrupt the whole process.
def write_chunked(page_block_id, text, chunk_size = 2000):
    for i in range(0, len(text), chunk_size):
        chunk = text[i:i+chunk_size]
        if not write_to_page(page_block_id, create_block(chunk)):
            break
The content is again encapsulated in a JSON-compatible dictionary structure covering
formatting and other topics. In the preceding code, when we call the write_to_page
method, we also call the create_block  method to create this dictionary. We fill in the
text into this template by setting a value for the property content:
def create_block(content : str) -> dict:
    return {
        "children": [
            {
                "object": "block",
                "type": "paragraph",
                "paragraph": {
                    "rich_text": [
                        {
                            "type": "text",
                            "text": {

227 9.2 Agentic workflows without frameworks
                                "content": content,
                            },
                        }
                    ]
                },
            },
        ]
    }
Once this is written, we can embed all the code in a routine to ask a question. List-
ing 9.2 shows this code that would call LLMs and write the results to Notion. For
the note’s title, we combine a stock ticker, the current date, the prompt ID, and the
LLM used. 
from datetime import datetime
def ask_question(stock_ticker: str, prompt_id: str, 
                 prompt_text = None, llm = LLM.OPENAI) -> None:
    date_str = datetime.now().strftime("%Y_%m_%d")
    if stock_ticker:
        properties = get_title_property(
           f"{stock_ticker}-"
           f"{date_str}-{prompt_id}-{llm}")               
    else:
        properties = get_title_property(
            f"generic-{date_str}-{question_id}-{llm}")    
    page_block_id = create_page(properties)
    if prompt_text is None:               
        prompt_text = get_question_by_id(question_id)
    if len(prompt_text) > 0:
        write_chunked(page_block_id, prompt_text)    
        write_chunked(page_block_id, 
                      get_answer(stock_ticker, 
                                 prompt_text, 
                                 llm))      
Figure 9.3 illustrates how a notebook might appear if we continue submitting
prompts. The LLMs return answers, and we can perform fact-checking when we open
the notes to review the answers provided by the LLMs.
 Research is often interactive. With a data science notebook, you have your coding
environment from which you send prompts to an LLM. Collecting information from
our databases allows us to filter by tags and retrieve prompts by referencing their IDs.
The methods in listing 9.3 outline this. You receive all the prompts, along with their
IDs, related to a specified topic. In the reference case, the referenced ID is called
earnings_call .
 
 Listing 9.2 Submitting a prompt
Gets the title 
property
We can also pass text 
directly if we don’t 
want to fetch text 
from a database.
Writes the 
prompt first
Writes the answer 
from the LLM

228 CHAPTER  9AI agents
engine = create_engine('sqlite:///question.db')
all_questions = pd.read_sql('prompt', engine)
all_prompts = pd.read_sql('context', engine)
all_tags = pd.read_sql('tag', engine)
def get_prompt_by_id(id: str) -> str:    
    try:
        return all_prompts[all_prompts["id"] == id]["prompt"].iloc[0]
    except:
        return "No prompt found with that ID"
def get_prompts_per_tag(tag: str):    
    all_prompt_tags = all_tags.loc[
          all_tags['tag_name'] == tag, 
          'prompt_id'].tolist()
    return all_prompts[all_prompts['id'].isin(all_prompt_tags)]
all_prompts_per_category = get_prompts_per_category("earnings_call")
all_prompts_per_category
Then, by calling get_prompt_by_id("earnings_call") , you retrieve the prompt text
for the prompt_ID  "earnings_call" , which could be a prompt such as: “An earnings
call of the company is ahead. What should I check to decide whether to sell my posi-
tion or buy more?” Reading from the all_prompts_per_category  may not be enough,
as the prompt texts may be truncated if you display them on the screen.
 With that, all you need to do is call the ask_question  method with the correct
parameters, such as stock ticker and prompt ID, and you fill up your notion pages with
content. Based on the results, you can seek further details or begin fact-checking.
9.3 Framework for AI agents
Instead of a user communicating directly with the LLM, many frameworks provide
abstraction and add functionality to facilitate the interaction, such as prompt enhance-
ments and retrieval of augmented generation. If a user authorizes the AI agent, they
can access specific resources, such as personal data. Listing 9.3 Getting all prompts for a topic
Figure 9.3 Reference content of an investment research that stores responses in Notion
Gets a prompt 
by ID
Gets all prompts

229 9.3 Framework for AI agents
 We can examine the features of AI agents, as illustrated in figure 9.1 at the begin-
ning of this chapter. Developers are familiar with the distinctions between no-code
and code approaches in various fields of computer science. Data integration is a good
example. Some teams integrate data sources by writing code to interact with frame-
works such as Apache Kafka. They push data into Kafka topics, which are then distrib-
uted to all consumers who have subscribed to that topic. In contrast, other frameworks,
such as Apache NiFi, offer a user interface (UI). Users click on a data source, drag it
to a destination, and configure details.
 Companies often value tools that reduce complexity because they lack sufficient
qualified team members with programming skills. However, critics claim that click-
and-point tools are also just an abstraction of logic. Frequently, these “no-code tools”
miss core functionalities. Perhaps some teams can quickly click themselves into a first
demo, but then, when engineers need to put them into production, integrating non-
custom functionality takes more time, as if programmers had implemented the solu-
tion themselves.
 Using AI agents, developers encounter a similar strategic decision. Some frame-
works allow engineers to create agents via a UI. One of these frameworks is called n8n.
To build a workflow with n8n, you need to register for a user account on the platform,
which gives you access to the workflow UI. Users can create workflows on a canvas,
connecting them to an input, such as a messenger or a chat window. They can incor-
porate various services into the workflow, such as transcribing voice to text or invoking
LLMs with prompts based on the input. Click-and-drag tools are often easier to
grasp by watching videos than by reading books. Numerous interactive tutorials are
available that guide you step-by-step in creating your workflow. Let’s concentrate on
how to build AI agents using programming logic, which is often easier to comprehend
in a book.
9.3.1 From one-shot prompting to agents
Many videos explain what to click and how to collect the results of the past steps to
process further. As this book is titled Investing for Programmers , we aim to focus on creat-
ing workflows in general using development tools. LangChain is a framework for
developing applications that use LLMs. It simplifies the stages of the LLM application
life cycle. LangChain incorporates a broad and growing list of providers ( https:/ /mng
.bz/xZx6 ).
 A provider connects data sources and LLMs. Listing 9.4 shows an example that
executes a one-shot prompt using a LangChain module that wraps code around the
access to OpenAI’s LLMs.
from langchain_openai import ChatOpenAI
OPENAI_KEY = os.getenv("ai.openai.pwd")
llm = ChatOpenAI(
    model="gpt-4o",Listing 9.4 Executing a one-shot prompt using LangChain

230 CHAPTER  9AI agents
    temperature=0,
    max_tokens=None,
    timeout=None,
    max_retries=2,
    api_key=OPENAI_KEY)
messages = [
    (
        "system",
        investment_persona,
    ),
    ("human", "Provide a SWOT analysis of Google."),
]
ai_msg = llm.invoke(messages)  
ai_msg
We implemented the same functionality in chapter 8 using OpenAI’s native libraries.
We can now explore the integration of other LLMs, such as Anthropic ( https:/ /mng
.bz/AGXQ ), and observe that the code structure is similar.
NOTE In chapter 8, we explained how to create an investment persona.
Whenever you use LLMs to analyze investment opportunities, use the oppor-
tunity to provide LLMs as much information as possible about yourself.
Python is a language built on convention. If we have collections, the principle is that
regardless of the data structure used in the collection, the len()  method will always
return the number of items in the collection. Now, we also have a unification with
LangChain. We can assume that, for instance, no matter which LLM we use, the
method invoke()  will always send a prompt to the LLM. This also makes it easier to
add new LLMs, as with native providers, we would have to learn the specific details.
This is a good start, but it’s not yet LangChain’s primary value proposition.
 Let’s explore the snippet in listing 9.5. In this code, we integrate Yahoo Finance
News into our conversation.
from langchain.agents import AgentType, initialize_agent
from langchain_community.tools.yahoo_finance_news import YahooFinanceNewsTool
tools = [YahooFinanceNewsTool()]
agent_chain = initialize_agent(
    tools,
    llm,  # see listing 9.4
    agent=AgentType.ZERO_SHOT_REACT_DESCRIPTION,
    verbose=True,
)
agent_chain.invoke(
    "What happened today with Microsoft stocks?",  
)
This code snippet underlines a substantial difference from plain LLM calls. We use
agents that connect data sources to an LLM. In the code example, we set the verbosenessListing 9.5 Using LangChain with YahooSubmits the prompt
Submits the agent

231 9.3 Framework for AI agents
to True . Let’s look at the output of the agent. Following is the transcript of the previ-
ous listing 9.5, executed in April 2025:
Entering new AgentExecutor chain . . .
I should check the latest financial news for Microsoft to see what happened today.
Action: yahoo_finance_news
Action Input: MSFT
Observation: Is Microsoft (MSFT) the Best Machine Learning Stock to Buy Now?
We recently published a list of the 10 Best Machine Learning Stocks to Buy Now. In this
article, we’re going to take a look at where Microsoft Corporation (NASDAQ:MSFT)
stands against other machine-learning stocks. Grand View Research reported that the
global machine-learning market was valued at $36.73 billion in 2022. It’s now expected
to [ . . .]
Microsoft Corporation (MSFT): Still Among “Cleanest” AI Plays
We recently published a list of 10 AI Stocks to Watch Amid Market Volatility. In this
article, we’re going to take a look at where Microsoft Corporation (NASDAQ:MSFT)
stands against other AI stocks to watch amid market volatility. The uncertain
macroeconomic environment is diminishing investors’ readiness to pay high prices for
stocks related to [. . .]
Thought: Based on the news articles, it seems like Microsoft is still a strong player in the
machine learning and AI markets.
Final Answer: Microsoft stocks are still performing well in the machine learning and AI
sectors.
Finished chain.
As shown in the output, we’ve instructed LangChain to create an AI agent that
explores Yahoo Finance for news and integrates the collected information into
research for a given prompt. We can chain more tools together when running our
research. LangChain also enables us to incorporate providers into our research
using AI agents. We can implement code to access custom data and create custom
data providers for AI agents. This makes LangChain a robust framework that can aid
in research.
9.3.2 Retrieval-augmented generation
We can enhance LLM generation performance by providing additional data that is
inaccessible to LLMs during training. Recent data (e.g., data created after LLM train-
ing) or data unavailable due to restricted access (e.g., internal corporate data) are
good candidates for retrieval-augmented generation (RAG).
 The previous example illustrated how to integrate recent data using Yahoo
Finance. Pulling information from news resources helps balance missing data after

232 CHAPTER  9AI agents
model training. However, countless data sources can be integrated, at least in theory.
In chapter 11, we outline some of them, and they are so huge that you don’t want to
poll them from public web sources during prompting. We need to find a structured
way to provide access to additional data, including storing this extra data in databases.
 In the following example, we’ll add the earnings call transcripts of selected compa-
nies to the prompting. If an LLM had been trained some months ago, it wouldn’t have
had access to data from a recent event in which the executives of a public company
informed investors about the latest results. How do we get the earnings call data? Vari-
ous financial analysis platforms provide transcripts from earnings calls, but the ques-
tion is whether it’s possible to scrape them.
 When you have a vast amount of data, you want to store it in containers that allow
you to keep this data safe and accessible. We separate work to achieve this goal. One
process fetches data from various sources and loads it into a database. Prompt submis-
sions are part of a different approach, in which the LLM uses this database as an
extended brain. Let’s get our hands dirty.
LOADING  DATA
We need to fetch data from different sources. We can scrape pages from various finan-
cial analysis platforms using a web crawler, fetch information from downloaded docu-
ments, or load data via API or databases. Some of this data is also available through
public data exchange. As a reference example, you can load company filings from
Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system (EDGAR) offered by a data
marketplace from Amazon Web Services (AWS; https:/ /mng.bz/Z9a9 ).
 Use cases for professional hedge funds and investment firms, which load data from
various sources (e.g., many commercial providers) into their data platforms, are out-
side the scope of this book. Scraping data from multiple platforms poses a risk for a
book, as many platforms change their internal structures, and code samples that load
data from external web pages may no longer function properly. If you’re interested in
scraping data, you can explore frameworks such as Beautiful Soup and other libraries
that load data from various sources.
 Instead, we provide transcripts from earnings calls of companies in the automotive
sector as text files for download. Feel free to add data if you want to experiment with
the code.
 In listing 9.6, we show how to load these text files into memory. While the logic for
loading files should be familiar to most programmers, be aware that we add the
loaded text to a LangChain-specific data structure to store additional documents for
prompt submission.
from langchain_core.documents.base import Document
all_docs = []Listing 9.6 Loading text files into memory

233 9.3 Framework for AI agents
files = ["pony.txt", "oust.txt", "lazr.txt", "invz.txt", "aeva.txt"]
for f in files:
    file = open(f, "r")
    content = file.read()
    doc = Document(content)  
    all_docs.append(doc)
    file.close()
Let’s provide additional context. In this reference example, we want to explore auton-
omous driving companies. We can run two different contexts to validate the function-
ality. In one context, we state that we believe in Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR)
systems; in the other, we state that we prefer companies that don’t focus on LiDAR.
We’ll submit both contexts separately later to validate that the answers differ. We
expect different recommendations based on our configuration, such as whether we
prefer LiDAR technologies.
 Listing 9.7 outlines how to define and add these preferences to the catalog. Note
that we need to recreate the data structures to rerun the example with a different
context.
generic = """I have a computer science background. I have worked on various
 digital transformation projects for multiple companies. I understand well
 how AI can change companies' businesses. I am looking for stocks of
 companies that might get transformed through AI but have not yet been
 overrun by investors."""
pro_lidar_text = """I believe in the future of autonomous driving. 
Autonomous driving needs a LiDAR system. Do not recommend any companies
 that reject LiDAR."""
con_lidar_context = """Please prefer companies that focus on solutions 
without LiDAR systems as they are expensive."""
all_docs.append(Document(generic + pro_lidar_text))
After executing this script, all the documents have been collected. Let’s transform the
data to be submitted to an LLM. Because we have a large amount of text in memory,
we need to convert it into a format that an LLM can understand.
PREPARING  DATA
We have data in memory, and to use all the content in RAGs, we need to add it to a
vector database. A vector database is a storage container that enables the storage of
vector embeddings. All the variable content in our memory must now be mapped as
vectors. This helps us orchestrate workflows in which, during a prompt submission,
this additional information is evaluated and processed accordingly. We accumulate
vast amounts of information in more advanced scenarios and store it in dedicated
databases, such as PostgreSQL or MongoDB. We use an in-memory database for thisListing 9.7 Providing additional contextLoads data into specific 
containers for LangChain

234 CHAPTER  9AI agents
reference example to focus on the use case and not get distracted by data platform
management. In listing 9.8, we split the data from the documents into subdocuments.
from langchain_text_splitters import RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter
text_splitter = RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter(
    chunk_size=1000,
    chunk_overlap=200,
    add_start_index=True,
)
all_splits = text_splitter.split_documents(all_docs)
print(f"Split blog post into {len(all_splits)} sub-documents.")
Once we’ve split the documents into enough chunks, we need to convert them into
embeddings. Each LLM has its standard. Listing 9.9 shows how to add all the chunks
into an in-memory vector database using OpenAI embeddings.
from langchain_openai import OpenAIEmbeddings
embeddings = OpenAIEmbeddings(model="text-embedding-3-large")
from langchain_core.vectorstores import InMemoryVectorStore
vector_store = InMemoryVectorStore(embeddings)
document_ids = vector_store.add_documents(documents=all_splits)
Now that everything is ready and prepared, we need to move to the final stages: sub-
mitting prompts and evaluating results. We expect to see different results depending
on whether we state that we believe in LiDAR or not, and we also expect some of the
content from the RAG to be reflected in the response.
CALL
In a RAG, we’ll build execution graphs. These involve data structures to help orches-
trate workflows. Programmers who have worked with Apache Spark or Apache Airflow
are familiar with the directed acyclic graph (DAG) concept. We create a class called
Stage  that contains variables for the question, context, and response.
 We also have methods for two stages. In one stage, we retrieve data from the vector
database. Of course, what content we need from the data that we currently hold in
memory depends on the question we send as a parameter. Lastly, we need to submit
the prompt. Listing 9.10 shows this logic. The methods retrieve  and generate  repre-
sent two separate steps in processing the prompt.
from langchain_core.documents import Document
from typing_extensions import List, TypedDict
from langchain import hub
prompt = hub.pull("rlm/rag-prompt")Listing 9.8 Chunking data
Listing 9.9 Adding all text in an in-memory vector database
Listing 9.10 Creating helper structures

235 9.3 Framework for AI agents
class State(TypedDict):
    question: str
    context: List[Document]
    answer: str
def retrieve(state: State):
    retrieved_docs = vector_store.similarity_search(state["question"])
    return {"context": retrieved_docs}
def generate(state: State):
    docs_content = "\n\n".join(doc.page_content for doc in state["context"])
    messages = prompt.invoke({"question": state["question"], "context": 
docs_content})
    response = llm.invoke(messages)
    return {"answer": response.content}
In the next step, we define a question and initialize the LLM. In this example, we use
the GPT-4.1 model from OpenAI:
from langchain.chat_models import init_chat_model
llm = init_chat_model("gpt-4.1", model_provider="openai")
question = "Recommend companies in the autonomous driving sector with good"
  " recent earnings."
Our inquiry is about autonomous driving. We kept the prompt small to focus on clar-
ity. Normally, you would often provide a longer prompt with more context and detail,
as shown in chapter 8.
 Listing 9.11 is our last step before execution. This snippet outlines how the
orchestration works. We add both steps to a state machine and define the retrieve
step as the starting point. The other sequence, generating first and retrieving addi-
tional content later, wouldn’t make sense. Keep in mind that execution workflows
can become more complex with time. In the last line, we call the method to display
the execution graph.
from langgraph.graph import START, StateGraph
from IPython.display import Image, display
graph_builder = (StateGraph(State).add_sequence
                ([retrieve, generate]))           
graph_builder.add_edge(START, "retrieve")         
graph = graph_builder.compile()
display(Image(graph.get_graph().draw_mermaid_png()))  
Figure 9.4 outlines the execution graph where we first retrieve and then generate.
The execution can become more complicated in more complex scenarios, but two
stages are sufficient for this case.Listing 9.11 Building an execution graph
Adds edges to the graph
Displays the 
execution graph

236 CHAPTER  9AI agents
Lastly, invoke the whole graph in which you submit the prompt with the question.
This invocation will also include retrieving information from the vector database:
result = graph.invoke({"question": question})
print(f'Answer: {result["answer"]}')
The author received the following response when presented with a positive context
about LiDAR:
Answer: Based on recent strong earnings and leadership in LiDAR technology for
autonomous driving, Innoviz is recommended. Innoviz has secured partnerships with key
players like Mobileye and integration with NVIDIA’s platform, while expanding
production to meet rising demand. Additionally, Chinese robotaxi companies using
LiDAR technology—with regulatory approvals and commercial fleet operations—are
well-positioned, though specific company names aren’t given in the provided context.
We get a recommendation for Innoviz. If we review the earnings call transcript, we’ll
also find a reference to this partnership with Mobileye. 
 Now, we examine the opposite scenario, in which we claim we don’t prefer LiDAR.
The last Mobileye earnings call wasn’t included in the supplied documents; however,
we can find information on the internet indicating that Mobileye has halted its efforts
on LiDAR:
Based on the context, Mobileye is a notable company in autonomous driving with strong
recent partnerships, OEM programs, and good earnings momentum, focusing on AI-
powered solutions that don’t rely heavily on expensive LiDAR. The context also notes
significant regulatory progress and commercial operation scale among companies with
robotaxi services, suggesting strong business fundamentals for leading players in this
space. Considering your preference to avoid LiDAR-centric approaches and the need for
companies not currently overrun by investors, Mobileye stands out as a promising
candidate.
Figure 9.4 The execution graph from the RAG engines, 
which contains information retrieval from the RAG and 
output generation using RAG and LLM data

237 Summary
We can now run agents with many different data sources. This should be done for
now, and we can investigate charts and perform technical analysis. Many details in this
chapter are based on earlier chapters in which we advocated investing in what we
know. In the same way, to receive good answers, we need to know what to ask, which
leads to the question of what additional context we need to provide. The final part is
submitting the question as a prompt and evaluating the answer.
Summary
Communication with humans and AI has parallels. You can enhance your com-
munication skills by using the right tools.
To communicate more effectively, we can gain access to specific information
sources that would otherwise be inaccessible, allowing us to strategize more
effectively when communicating.
We can store prompts in a simple database to reuse them later.
If you want to research special topics, you can collect all prompts in a database
and tag them to find them on demand.
Notion is a note-taking tool that allows you to export all your research to
one place.
Without specialized frameworks to facilitate AI agents, working with LLMs
requires a significant amount of custom work. For example, accessing specific
data sources for RAG requires writing a substantial amount of code to connect
the data to an LLM.
AI agents help automate and streamline conversations with AI.
AI agents often have providers for additional data sources, which enables us to
orchestrate LLMs to gain new insights.
N8n is a no-code framework that orchestrates workflows using AI agents.
LangChain is a framework for developing applications powered by LLMs. It can
integrate different data sources into AI agent workflows.
LangChain streamlines access to LLMs. All calls to invoke prompts are there-
fore syntactically similar.
LangChain has an extensive list of existing providers and provides an interface
to programmers to add additional providers.
Using LangChain, we can create AI agents that query recent financial news and
then invoke a prompt in an LLM, incorporating the retrieved information into
the analysis.
LangChain provides a mechanism for logging the workflow of AI agents during
their execution, offering valuable insights into how these agents operate.
RAG is an approach to providing an LLM with additional data beyond its train-
ing data.

238 CHAPTER  9AI agents
We can hold additional information for response generation in a vector data-
base. For this, we need to prepare the data by converting it into specific data
structures, known as vector embeddings.
In many complex use cases, we need a data platform such as a RAG database.
For simple use cases, an in-memory vector database is fine.
We can create execution workflows as a graph that orchestrates workflows.

239Charts and
technical analysis
Imagine being presented with a captivating product—something you never consid-
ered but now find yourself intrigued by. The possibilities are endless, whether it’s a
stunning piece of art, a luxurious property, or an exquisite car. Now, picture that
the seller turns to you, eyes glinting with opportunity, and asks, “How much would
you offer?”
 Imagine you’ve never bought a similar product. No advisor stands next to you,
and you can’t ask any search engine or AI chatbot for a reasonable price. Without
any historical data or reference, all you can do is guess.
 Many potential buyers find this situation distressing. If they overpay, they might
regret their purchase for years. However, offering too little can cause issues. A buyerThis chapter covers
Interpreting patterns in charts
How to use candlesticks
Which averages help you assess stocks
Bollinger Bands, moving average convergence 
divergence, and moving average ribbons
Displaying an Ichimoku Cloud
Using Streamlit for visualization

240 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
risks offending the seller or showing everyone around them that they are unaware of
the market value, which can jeopardize their reputation.
 Historical data provide a solid foundation for informed decisions. For instance, if
you know the purchase price of neighboring houses, you can at least estimate the
price of real estate (though you could still end up with a lousy deal for various rea-
sons). The more data you have, the easier it is to determine if the price is reasonable.
 Technical analysis of financial data is, to a large extent, a study of historical price
developments. Knowledge about past movements is good. However, it’s even better
when historical prices are visualized, as many people prefer visuals over numbers in
tables. Let’s start by looking at charts and how we can interpret them. Afterward,
we’ll examine specific charts for investment and explore how to visualize informa-
tion ourselves.
10.1 Charts
In previous chapters, we often plotted charts using share prices over time. The idea that
charts represent data is, therefore, not a new concept. Once you have price and time,
you can plot a chart where the x-axis is usually the time, and the y-axis defines the value
of an asset in a currency. Let’s examine a chart without context in figure 10.1.
We can start making assumptions if we look at a chart without context. Knowing that
the x-axis represents time and the y-axis represents price, we see that the cost of an
asset was relatively stable until approximately the middle of the chart. Then some-
thing happened, and we had a sharp decline with minor corrections in between. We
can make basic observations without context, but to interpret what was going on, we
need details. Let’s add some context and examine figure 10.2.
5800
5600
5400
5200
5000Closing Price
Price
Figure 10.1 A chart without context in which we still must interpret a lot

241 10.1 Charts
With context, we can give meaning to charts. We understand that we’re looking at the
S&P 500. We examine a relatively short interval of a few days, as we have data on the
S&P 500 since its inception on March 4, 1957.
 If we had the data displayed in the chart as a DataFrame, we would have time series
data starting from April 1 at a price of around $5,600 and ending slightly below
$5,000. We don’t know how many data points this DataFrame would hold, as this
depends on the update frequency. We’ll have 60 times as much data if the data is
updated per minute than if it’s updated per hour.
 The price of the S&P 500 data has fallen by 11.15%. Someone who had a value of
$100,000 in an index fund that mirrors the S&P 500 would lose $11,150 in value
within five days. This chart appears alarming to conservative investors, who expect
the value of their assets to increase. But at the same time, let’s look at a chart in fig-
ure 10.3.
 Someone accustomed to price movements, such as those seen with GameStop
stock, might find the changes in the S&P 500 less dramatic. After all, an 11% draw-
down at an index doesn’t mean the value is likely gone forever. Unless there is a dra-
matic shift in the global economy, index prices are expected to continue recovering
and growing. However, the S&P 500 is an index fund, and comparing it to the share
price development of a distressed company is far-fetched. Let’s relate the data to other
past stock market crashes to understand what falling by more than 10% means in a
short time frame. We see in table 10.1 that losses following President Trump’s announce-
ment of sweeping tariffs on foreign goods were comparable to those in the aftermath
of the Lehman Brothers’ collapse.
5800
5600
5400
5200
5000Price^GSPC
2025-03-25 2025-03-27 2025-03-29 2025-03-31 2025-04-01 2025-04-07 2025-04-03 2025-04-05 2025-04-09
DateClosing Price
Figure 10.2 The price development of the S&P 500 (ticker: ^GSPC) after Liberation Day (April 2, 2025), in which 
President Donald Trump announced a fundamental change in the US tariff strategy

242 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
We can also scale out and examine a larger time interval to determine what a drop
in share prices signifies. In figure 10.4, we present the S&P 500 data from Novem-
ber 1996.
 We see some drawdowns in the chart. We see the dot-com crash, the Lehman
Brothers’ bankruptcy, COVID, and the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The
aftermath of Liberation Day will leave a lasting effect on the chart, one that will
remain visible for decades to come. However, even after falling significantly, the S&P
500 remains higher in April 2025 than it was at the beginning of 2024.
 Let’s look at other charts and focus on single stocks. In figure 10.5, we examine
NVIDIA’s share price development.Table 10.1 Five most significant drawdowns in the past few decades
Day Date % Change 
Black Monday October 19, 1987 –24.57
Black Tuesday October 20, 1987 –16.23
Covid-19 pandemic March 12, 2020 –13.93
Lehman Brothers’ collapse November 20, 2008 –12.43
US tariff announcement April 4, 2025 –10.53
Closing PriceGME
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10Price
2021-01-21 2021-01-23 2021-01-25 2021-01-27 2021-01-29 2021-01-31 2021-02-01
Date
Figure 10.3 The extreme price development of GameStop is often seen as a case study for volatile share prices. 
GameStop is a video game retailer whose share price rose after discussions on the subreddit r/wallstreetbets 
suggested that the stock was undervalued. This resulted in significant losses for hedge funds that had shorted 
the stock.

243 10.1 Charts
^GSPC
Closing Price
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000Price
1996 2000 2004 2008 2012 2016 2020 2024
Date
Figure 10.4 The S&P index from November to April 4, 1996, shows various crises in the past, such as the dot-
com bubble burst (early 2000), the housing crisis (2008), the COVID-19 pandemic (2020), the assault on Ukraine 
(2022), and the announcement of tariffs by the United States (2025).
NVDA
Closing Price
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0Price
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Date
Figure 10.5 NVIDIA’s share price data grew by 1787.89% in five years, which is an exceptional result in the 
stock market’s history.

244 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
Single stocks are more volatile than indices. A buyer who purchased NVIDIA shares at
a price equivalent to $6.65 in 2020 would have made a good decision. After five years,
having $120 per share is the fulfillment of every investor’s dream.
NOTE Remember that NVIDIA has undergone two stock splits since 2020. If
you bought one share of stock in January 2020 for $266, it would have been
split into 40 shares.
Technology companies often aim for significant growth, relying heavily on being at
the forefront of innovation to outperform competitors. Consequently, they usually
exhibit a higher price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio and lower dividend payments, as a sig-
nificant portion of the earnings is reinvested in R&D. If competitors outperform
them, a technology company that doesn’t consistently increase its yearly earnings
compared to its competitors can be a risky investment.
 Figure 10.6 outlines NVIDIA’s earnings. As this company grows and generates
more revenue, investors have a positive outlook for a company that continues to grow.
Even if NVIDIA’s P/E ratio is higher today than some of its peers, NVIDIA can be a
good asset when calculating potential future growth.
In chapter 7, our portfolio analysis concluded that, based on historical returns, we
should allocate a greater weight to Pfizer and NVIDIA in a portfolio. Let’s examine
Pfizer in figure 10.7, which tells a different story than NVIDIA’s.
 If we bought Pfizer shares in 2020, we would have less value today. Pfizer is a high-
dividend-paying stock, meaning we would have received annual payments over the
years, which helps balance out some of the missing capital appreciation.
 The Pfizer chart reflects the history of COVID-19. This is also reflected in its earn-
ings, as shown in figure 10.8.
 Earnings are a substantial factor for every company. However, we can’t expect con-
stant increases in earnings in every sector. Pfizer investors would have to accept that
the earnings during the COVID-19 pandemic’s peak can’t last forever. Still, they canJan 2021 Jan 2022 Jan 2023 Jan 2024 Jan 2026 Jan 2027 Jan 20250B60B240B300B
120B180BNVIDIA: Revenue over the years
Figure 10.6 NVIDIA’s annual revenue, including estimates for 2026 and 2027 that were 
reported in January 2025

245 10.1 Charts
also expect Pfizer to continue generating sufficient revenue to pay good dividends
and grow at a steady pace.
 Earnings and share prices can correlate. Often, a profitable year is reflected in the
share price. Investors watch an earnings call, see tremendous results, and buy shares.
If the results are disappointing, they sell. Technical analysis also looks at share prices,
but the focus is different. Technical analysis tries to discover patterns in price develop-
ment to forecast share prices based on these patterns. This may sound like supersti-
tion, but if everyone believes in the same patterns, these patterns will reappear
because some individuals follow these signals, and then many more follow the herd,
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Date50
45
40
35
30
25
20PriceClosing PricePFE
Figure 10.7 Pfizer shares provided no capital appreciation if you bought shares five years ago, which means that 
sometimes buying low and selling high doesn’t always work out.
Dec 2020 Dec 2021 Dec 2022 Dec 2023 Jan 2026 Jan 2027 Dec 20240B25B100B125B
50B75BPﬁzer: Revenue over the years
Figure 10.8 Pfizer had massive earnings during the COVID-19 pandemic, and once it was over, 
the earnings went back.

246 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
causing the repeating trend. Let’s delve deeper by examining charts and defining
these patterns that may influence technical analysts’ decisions.
10.1.1 Reading charts
Let’s examine the charts in figure 10.9. These charts show the price developments of
assets over the past five years.
Some talent shows require candidates to solve challenges. If there were a talent show
for investors, one of the challenges could be to ask contestants to identify the com-
pany when presented with unlabeled charts. Sort of like Name That Tune . Some
investors can do that for familiar charts. They might look at Bitcoin and say some-
thing like this: 
Do you see these two humps on the left? Remember, this was 2021. The year started so
well. In May, I thought I was screwed and then in November I cheered again until . . .
well you know the story, Luna, FTX, it was a nightmare for a while.
Now, there’s a game show I would watch! Identifying some patterns is a start—even if
we don’t have names for them yet—because you create stories based on the patterns.
You rose to the stars, to fall again, and then you were reborn to rise like a phoenix
again! Some stories of share price developments could be dramatized. Let’s have a
closer look.
Figure 10.9 Four charts (NVIDIA, Bitcoin, the 10-year USD T-Notes/T-Bond yield interest rate, and the US dollar 
exchange rate to the euro). Every chart tells a story, and we can assume what was happening.

247 10.1 Charts
10.1.2 Patterns
Let’s examine asset price changes to see if we can identify similarities. The pattern in
the Bitcoin chart, which we previously referred to as humps, can be interpreted as a
bearish double top. Look at figure 10.10, which depicts this pattern and reflects share
price developments (vertical) over time (horizontal).
First, we have an uptrend. Traders are excited; they see momentum and expect more
gains. The asset price will increase as investors see rewards from buying low and sell-
ing high, and continue to buy. Various platforms assess the mood of their clients and
provide a fear and greed index about specific assets. In this phase, investors’ senti-
ment is characterized by extreme greed.
 Then, we reach a point where the mood turns, marked in the chart as Top 1. The
reasons for the trend reversal can be manifold, but investors likely examined the fun-
damentals and judged the asset as overvalued following the price increase. PeopleUniversal principles?
Are there general insights about how prices must move? Let’s give it a try. One prin-
ciple is mean reversion : what goes up must go down again, and vice versa. If we see
mean reversion as a guiding principle, we’re tempted to sell after a massive rally,
believing a market correction is inevitable.
Someone who sees momentum  as a core principle might disagree. If a stock rises,
its momentum can continue to increase. Why sell if a streak is ongoing? Although the
momentum won’t last forever, they will try to ride it as long as possible.
A contrarian investor  might disagree with that assessment. They might say, “I will lose
if I do what the market does. I instead look for something that nobody else does.”
Investors hold different and sometimes conflicting beliefs. If a share price increases,
a believer in mean reversion and a contrarian might advise selling, while a momen-
tum believer might suggest holding or even continuing to buy. Everyone can’t always
be right.
Bearish Double TopNeckline (Support)Top 1 Top 2
Resistance
UptrendBreakout Point
Figure 10.10 The bearish double top is 
a pattern that, after an uptrend, has two 
peaks before it goes down again. If traders 
identify this pattern in time, they can sell 
or buy accordingly.

248 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
start to sell, and the mood changes. However, enough people still see potential in that
asset and begin buying again at some point. The price goes up again. Then, after the
second reversal, the price drops again. But this time, the downtrend continues.
 You can look up many chart patterns online or in technical analysis documents.
They will find many examples, such as the head-and-shoulders, rising wedge, expand-
ing triangle, triple top, or pennant pattern. The basic idea remains the same: there
are up-and-down movements, and a trader attempts to identify patterns based on past
experiences to predict what comes next. Each pattern has a bearish and bullish form,
as shown in figure 10.11.
The double top is a reversal pattern. The bearish version starts with an uptrend and
ends with a downtrend, and vice versa in the bullish version. It’s also a continuation
pattern. It starts with a trend until it gets into an opposite trend, to turn into its origi-
nal trend again. Figure 10.12 provides an example of bullish and bearish flag patterns
as a reference for a continuation pattern. Again, we start with a trend being disrupted
by an opposite trend. Eventually, however, the original trend continues in a continua-
tion pattern.Bearish Double Top Bullish Double Top
Figure 10.11 A bullish double top and its “twin”, the bearish double top. Investors looking up other 
chart patterns, such as the head and shoulders or rising wedge, will always find bullish or bearish 
patterns.
Bearish Flag Pattern Bullish Flag Pattern
Figure 10.12 The bullish and bearish flag patterns are reference examples for continuation patterns. 
A temporary initial trend was reversed and continues again in the same direction.

249 10.1 Charts
Chart patterns are just templates. “Chart whisperers” have often been wrong in the
past. Many of them have misjudged movements, as there is no guarantee that asset
prices will always follow the pattern.
 When an asset’s price falls, analysts often discuss support lines. A support line  is a
price level at which an asset is unlikely to fall. Investors also frequently discuss resis-
tance lines , which are high prices that are difficult to break through. Another import-
ant term is breakout , when a price crosses a support or resistance line.
 Support and resistance lines are essential for investors who explore more volatile
assets. At the time of writing, the price of 1 Bitcoin is $78,940. Analysts may suggest
that we see a support line at $72,000, which is another way of saying that it’s unlikely
for the price to drop below that level unless an external event occurs.
 Although support and resistance lines are an interpretation of data, we must not
overlook the psychological effect. Imagine a resistance line at $100,000. You see prices
going up and down, and when the price is nearing $100,000, you may hear yourself
arguing in your head. The more adventurous you might say: “Come on, buddy! Buy!
It’s an asset that will always go up in the long run. Today is the day, you’ll see.” The
more cautious you will reply to that, something like: “Investors are rational beings.
The price of that asset is already so high, and six digits are huge. While you buy below
$100,000, others will sell, and the price will decrease. You’ll sit on an asset you can’t
sell for profit. Better to wait until the price drops.” Again, your adventurous part
might reply, “What if it crosses the resistance line and never goes back? We must buy
now, or it’s too late.” While knowing current resistance or support lines is essential for
traders, long-term investors may ignore them, as their idea is that assets will continue
to grow over a long period.
 The shorter the time window you aim to hold an asset, the more critical chart pat-
terns become. Short-term traders tend to borrow resources—using leverage—to buy
assets. If they don’t sell soon, they must pay interest.
 Conclusively, charts can help traders and investors decide when it’s a good time to
buy and sell. Additionally, long-term investors won’t ignore them entirely. Let’s exam-
ine how we can interpret a chart.
10.1.3 Interpreting a chart
Many financial analysis platforms such as TradingView, Finviz, and Seeking Alpha provide
advanced charting features. They allow you to plot the share prices, and you can add
indicators on top of the chart showing price movements. This chapter will show how to
plot some of these indicators in later sections using Python. But be aware that the indica-
tors presented in this book, such as moving averages, Bollinger Bands, or Ichimoku
Cloud, are a small selection of the existing indicators that advanced charts provide.
 Figure 10.13 shows a chart on Finviz.com, which also provides charting functional-
ities. You can view the chart with the latest data on that asset (NuScale Power Corpora-
tion) at https:/ /finviz.com/quote.ashx?t=SMR&p=d . The screenshot is based on data
from June 13, 2025.

250 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
Technical investors attempt to identify bearish and bullish patterns based on such
charts. You can even paste screenshots like the previous one into a GenAI chatbot and
ask the LLM to recognize patterns. It will return interpretations and, in some cases,
even speculate on possible price developments based on signals such as a golden cross
in late May, which describes that an SMA 50 crossed above the SMA 200 (we’ll investi-
gate simple moving averages [SMAs] later in this chapter).
 Some investors argue that the effectiveness of technical analysis hasn’t been
proven and consider it a form of gambling. Others will tell you they start making
money if they are successful, just 51% of the time. Whether you try to leverage price
patterns for short-term trading or not, reading charts is also essential for long-term
investors, as they tell an important story over time.
 An asset has momentum, which is often reflected in patterns on the chart. Time is
also an essential aspect of reading a chart. While a share price might decrease in the
short term, a long-term trader may not be overly concerned if they still see a long-term
upward trend. A short-term trader who has borrowed money to buy leveraged assets
must make decisions earlier, as they must pay interest on the borrowed funds.
 Technical traders develop algorithms to analyze moving averages, Bollinger Bands,
Fibonacci retracements, Elliott waves, and other technical indicators. Many technical
investors employ SMA crossover strategies, such as the 200-day SMA versus the 5-day
SMA. Let’s look at some of these principles to understand what this is all about.
10.1.4 Alternative chart types
While we primarily use line charts to visualize the price of an asset over time, investors
often employ other chart types as well. Let’s explore some of them. 
Figure 10.13 A NuScale (SMR) chart provided by Finviz.com shows how quickly we can perceive price 
movements over a longer time when the details are visualized.

251 10.1 Charts
TREEMAPS
Treemaps have become popular on platforms such as Finviz. They show the growth
and fall of prices. Figure 10.14 shows the treemap displayed on Finviz. 
BAR CHART
Bar charts can help show the distribution of elements within a category. Again, Finviz
provides an excellent example that can be explored at https:/ /finviz.com/groups
.ashx . In figure 10.15, we can see which sectors did well within one day. Finviz also pro-
vides bar charts that reflect the performance of assets over an extended period.
HISTOGRAM
Histograms plot the distribution of values for a numeric variable as a series of bars, so
we can use them to validate whether the data follows a Gaussian distribution. In chap-
ter 7, we used a histogram in a Monte Carlo simulation to display returns, as shown in
figure 10.16. Here, we have them distributed well-balanced over a Gaussian curve.
SCATTERPLOT
In chapter 8, we used a scatterplot to plot companies. A scatterplot helps to identify
interesting assets if you group multiples of them based on various criteria. For exam-
ple, if we’re interested in examining multiple assets based on risk and returns, we can
plot them in a scatterplot with risk and return axes, as shown in chapter 8.
Figure 10.14 A treemap from Finviz gives us an idea about price movement. Check out today’s chart 
(https:/ /finviz.com/map.ashx ) to get the latest data, drill down, interactively, and get a better impression of 
how much you can read through the color scheme.

252 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
We again display the figure from chapter 8 in figure 10.17 to immediately illustrate
the value of a scatterplot. We see three outliers. The dot on the far left represents an
asset that has lost significant value. If we hovered over the dot, we would know that it’s
Moderna, a capital-intensive business that is, among other things, affected by high fed-
eral interest rates. The topmost dot represents Super Micro Computer, a semiconduc-
tor company that had been in turmoil due to its failure to report on time, whichBasic Materials
Energy
Technology
Health Care
Financial
Industrials
Utilities
Consumer Defensive
Consumer Cyclical
Real Estate
Communication Services1 DAY PERFORMANCE
0% 0.5% 1% 1.5% 2% 2.5% 3% 3.5% 4%+3.64
+1.71
+1.59
+1.49
+1.16+1.49+1.49+2.93
+2.35
+2.07
+1.85
+1.31
+1.28
Figure 10.15 A bar chart showing the distribution of growth by sector within a day. Bar charts are effective for 
illustrating the distribution of elements within a group.
Figure 10.16 This shows a histogram of Apple’s returns over time, indicating that the returns of Apple 
follow a normal distribution, which, in other words, means there’s no need to worry about the stock’s 
performance.

253 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
caused its share price to plummet. On the far right, we have Palantir, whose high
returns are also reflected in its P/E ratio, as indicated by a review of that ratio.
10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
We learned how charts can help us gain faster insights than viewing the raw data. In a
sense, charts are a shortcut to data analysis. Now, we shift our focus slightly toward
analyzing price movements by putting them into context, which is essential for some
investment and trading strategies.
 At the beginning of this chapter, we highlighted that a price tag without additional
knowledge and context can be confusing. Something we want to buy has an intrinsic
value, also called the real value. The essential pattern in trading goods that existed
already before the advent of money was to get a better value in goods exchange. This
universal principle also applies to securities: we can make good or bad deals depend-
ing on the price we pay to acquire an asset.
 When studying fundamentals, as we did in the previous chapters, we examine a
company’s details to determine whether an asset has lost or gained value. Efficient
market theorists, such as Eugene Fama, say that assets are priced approximately at
their worth unless you’re an insider and know things the rest of the investors can’t
know. Some experts disagree with the efficient market theory, as some investors have
repeatedly beaten the market.
 By analyzing fundamentals, you determine what you believe the company is worth.
You investigate changes in balance sheets and other documents to hypothesize
whether an asset is undervalued or overvalued based on changes within the company.
Analyzing price development in charts is a different approach, often called technical
analysis. In this aspect, you examine price developments over time concerning what
the market thinks the company is worth to determine trends, so you time your pur-
chases accordingly. Let’s get started.
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2Volatility
−1.5−
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
ReturnsFigure 10.17 A scatterplot that 
categorizes stocks by volatility 
and returns

254 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
10.2.1 Candlesticks
Candlestick charts visualize price movements in financial markets. They provide insights
into market sentiment and show how prices fluctuate within a given time frame.
 A candlestick chart is like a time series plot, but enhanced with additional informa-
tion about a stock, cryptocurrency, or other financial asset’s open, high, low, and close
(OHLC) prices. Let’s look at the anatomy of candlesticks to see how they work.
ANATOMY  OF A CANDLESTICK  CHART
Figure 10.18 shows NVIDIA’s candlestick chart for three trading days with each can-
dlestick representing a day in this chart. Time is scalable, meaning we can view it in
terms of hours or months in such a chart.
Candlesticks use different schemata. On most platforms, the schema is represented
by green and red colors. White and black are also common for other use cases, such
as in print media like this book. If the candlestick is green or white, it means that,
within the specified period—one day in our example—the closing price is higher
than the opening price, indicating a bullish movement. If the closing price is lower
than the opening price, the body is red or black, indicating a bearish movement (the
price has decreased). If you’re interested in seeing charts as examples, you can explore
platforms such as Finviz ( https:/ /finviz.com ) or TradingView ( www.tradingview.com ),
w h e r e  y o u  c a n  d r i l l  d o w n  i n t o  c h a r t s  a n d  z o o m  i n  o n  s p e c i f i c  d a y s  t o  e x a m i n e
Figure 10.18 This candlestick diagram references three trading days of NVIDIA, from which we deduce 
price movements. Days 1 and 3 ended with a lower closing price than the opening price, and we can also 
see that on Day 3, the price was more volatile than on the preceding days.

255 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
details. It’s also often helpful to study charts of companies you know, as you can
usually see how investors reacted to specific catalysts affecting your company (see
chapter 11).
 Figure 10.19 shows the anatomy of a candlestick. The height of the candle’s
body represents the difference between the opening and closing prices. The wicks,
also known as shadows, represent the highest and lowest prices reached during the
trading period, as depicted by a candle. The upper wick extends from the top of
the body to the highest point, and the lower wick extends from the bottom to the
lowest point.
Knowing all of this and referring to figure 10.18 shown earlier, the share price began
at $138 on January 10th. It rallied up during the day until it reached $140, but it also
fell at some point to a bit above $134, to end a bit below $136.
 T o  c r e a t e  a  p l o t  s i m i l a r  t o  t h e  f i g u r e  1 0 . 1 9 ,  w e  n e e d  t h e  m p l f i n a n c e  l i b r a r y ,  a
Python library for financial data visualization. We load data from NVIDIA and plot it
as shown in listing 10.1. We get the same result as in figure 10.6 earlier.
import mplfinance as mpf
import pandas as pd
import yfinance as yf
ticker = "NVDA"
data = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(start="2025-01-10", end="2025-01-15")
df = pd.DataFrame(data).dropna()
mpf.plot(df, type='candle', style='charles', title='Candlestick Chart')
Now, let’s examine candlestick patterns in more detail to understand how we can inter-
pret their price movements. For that, we need to examine multiple consecutive days.Listing 10.1 Creating candlestick chartsWick
WickBodyHighest Highest
Opening
OpeningClosing
Closing
Lowest LowestFigure 10.19 The anatomy of a 
bullish (white) and bearish (black) 
candlestick

256 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
CANDLESTICK  PATTERNS
Candlestick patterns enable traders and investors to interpret price action quickly. We
can detect market trends, reversals, and continuation patterns by analyzing multiple
candles, such as the following:
Long wicks indicate rejection and support of certain price levels.
Small bodies suggest indecision in the market.
Large bodies indicate strong momentum.
Some patterns are commonly used to predict price movements, as shown in figure 10.20:
Doji—The opening and closing prices are almost the same, forming a small
body, which signals market indecision.
Hammer —A small body with a long lower wick indicates a potential reversal
after a downtrend.
Engulfing —A large candle that completely engulfs the previous one signals a
substantial shift in momentum.
Using the terminology from the figure, we can describe the patterns. A Spinning Top
is a pattern in which, on two consecutive days, we experience high price volatility
during the trading day but end up with a Doji. As another example, a Shooting Star is
a pattern that has a high volatility during the day, and then the closing price is lower
than the opening price. Being able to give the patterns names facilitates discussions
about trends with other investors. 
 Now that we know how to interpret candlesticks, we can investigate averages over
multiple periods to gain a deeper understanding of the share price development.
Let’s discuss that next.Spinning Tops Shooting Star Hammer Doji Bullish Engulﬁng
Bearish Engulﬁng Evening Star Morning Star 3 Soldiers 3 Crows
Figure 10.20 Various candlestick patterns in which we can describe the behavior of the 
market. In addition to the Doji, Hammer, and Engulfing patterns, we can see the volatility 
of prices. You immediately realize that candles with long bodies represent high volatility, 
whereas candles with multiple short bodies represent a calm market situation.

257 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
10.2.2 Charts based on averages
At the beginning of the chapter, we highlighted the importance of data about past
purchases. Imagine an item listed for $100. Knowing that similar items have been sold
for $80 on average will lead you to consider it differently than knowing that the item is
usually sold for $120.
 When working with shares with frequent price changes, we must examine price
developments over an extended period. In addition to highs and lows, one central
benchmark is the average price: you have three numbers—let’s take 1, 2, and 3—and
everyone with basic math skills knows that the average is 2. Let’s explore some more
complex scenarios.
 Let’s take the closing price of a stock for x days and calculate the average by adding
all values and dividing them by the total number of values. If we look at changes over
time, we set a window (say 20 days) and calculate the average. When we add a new
value to an existing set of 20 days, we remove the oldest value from the set. This is that
simple moving average (SMA) that we mentioned earlier in the chapter .
 We might wonder if it’s efficient to weigh all numbers the same. Would it not
make sense to weigh the more recent values higher than the oldest ones? For this
reason, other average calculation formulas incorporate weighting, such as the expo-
nential moving average (EMA), weighted moving average (WMA),  and Hull moving average
(HMA) , which we explore in this chapter . The goal is to smooth price data and iden-
tify trends earlier. As different average calculations have different goals, they target
different scenarios.
 In listing 10.2, we create a data set for demonstration and then apply the SMA and
EMA. The EMA weights the later values more. We define a set of random data and use
the algorithms.
import pandas as pd
data = {
    "Date": pd.date_range(start="2023-01-01", periods=10),
    "Price": [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19],
}
df = pd.DataFrame(data)
window_size = 3
df['SMA'] = df['Price'].rolling(
    window=window_size).mean()      
df['EMA'] = df['Price'].ewm(
    span=window_size, adjust=False).mean()    
Looking at the results, the EMA returns a slightly higher result (17.003906) for the
mean of 16, 17, and 18 than 17, which would be the result of SMA based on these num-
bers. These differences don’t seem significant unless you consider large transactions. IfListing 10.2 Calculating SMA and EMAs
SMA is the unweighted 
mean of the last N 
values.
EMA gives more weight 
to recent values.

258 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
you trade millions, it will have a considerable effect. Let’s compare data using histori-
cal share prices and add the remaining two average calculations.
NOTE We’ll use an option to limit floating-point numbers behind the decimal
point, using the following parameter to enhance visualization: pd.options
.display.float_format  = '{:,.2f}'.format .
The WMA also weights averages, but unlike the EMA, it does this linearly, balancing
some of the differences between the EMA and SMA. The HMA uses the WMA as a
base to smooth out the extra by adding half the time window and the square root of
the time window in the calculation. If you’re interested in the details, you can look up
the math; in brief, the formula is HMA > WMA > EMA > SMA. The further to the left,
the more sensitive our calculations are to recent changes. Let’s look at the Python
implementation in the following code:
def weighted_moving_average(prices, window):
    weights = np.arange(1, window + 1)
    return prices.rolling(window).apply(
       lambda x: np.dot(x, weights) / weights.sum(), raw=True)
def hull_moving_average(prices, window):
    half_window = int(window / 2)
    sqrt_window = int(np.sqrt(window))
    wma_half = weighted_moving_average(prices, half_window)
    wma_full = weighted_moving_average(prices, window)
    hma = weighted_moving_average(2 * wma_half - wma_full, sqrt_window)
    return hma
Now that everything is defined, let’s load data from NVIDIA for 2024 and compare the
results. In the following code, we load the data and add all averages of the closing
prices to the DataFrame.
import yfinance as yf
ticker = "NVDA"
data = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(start="2024-01-01", end="2024-12-31")
averages = pd.DataFrame(data).dropna()
averages.reset_index(inplace=True)
def add_averages(close, window_size):
    close['SMA'] = close['Close'].rolling(window=window_size).mean()
    close['EMA'] = close['Close'].ewm(span=window_size, adjust=False).mean()
    close['WMA'] = weighted_moving_average(close['Close'], window_size)
    close['HMA'] = hull_moving_average(close['Close'], window_size)
    return close[['Date', 'Close', 'SMA', 'EMA', 'WMA', 'HMA']]
Examining the data, we observe that the larger the window we use, the more not a
number (NaN) values we encounter at the beginning of the DataFrame. We’ll confirm
that each average has slightly different values. Let’s extract a single entry and look at
it. In table 10.2, we display the average for a 3-day window on February 2, 2024. In the
row below, we show the average for a 20-day time window on the same day.

259 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
Examining the EMA, WMA, and HMA, we can conclude that the more recent data is
weighted, the closer the results will be to the closing price of the last day. The SMA is
further away from the closing price. We can also conclude that the SMA reacts more
slowly to price changes than other moving averages. This doesn’t have to be negative;
if we look for long-term trends, recent spikes wouldn’t bother us. We can sum up with
the following conclusions:
SMA is the best for long-term trend analysis.
EMA is suitable for short-term trading strategies that require quicker reactions.
WMA offers a balance between EMA and SMA, emphasizing recent prices.
HMA is the most effective approach for detecting rapid trends.
We can also create another hypothesis. Regardless of which moving average we use, we
can also employ different time windows, which provide us with distinct insights. Let’s
look at that next.
MOVING  AVERAGE  RIBBONS
Moving average ribbons  visualize trend strengths: narrow ribbons indicate consolidation,
and wide ribbons show strong trends. In listing 10.3, which plots moving average rib-
bons, we use six windows: 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60.
import yfinance as yf
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
ticker = "NVDA"
df = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(start="2024-01-1", end="2025-01-1")
df.reset_index(inplace=True)
periods = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60]               
for period in periods:                           
    df[f"SMA_{period}"] = df["Close"].rolling(
        window=period).mean()                    
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
plt.plot(df["Date"], df["Close"], label="Price", color="black", 
linewidth=1.5)
for period in periods:
    plt.plot(df["Date"], df[f"SMA_{period}"], label=f"SMA {period}")
plt.title("Moving Average Ribbon")
plt.xlabel("Date")
plt.ylabel("Price")Table 10.2 Multiple averages for the same day, each with a different time window
Window (days) Closing SMA EMA WMA HMA
3 66.14 63.55 64.29 64.33 67.96
20 66.14 58.33 58.83 60.60 64.19
Listing 10.3 Plotting moving average ribbons
Creates different 
windows

260 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
plt.legend()
plt.grid()
plt.show()
The results are shown in figure 10.21. We observe fewer movements in May and Octo-
ber, indicating that the price has been more stable than at other times, where the rib-
bons are more spread out.
NOTE We’ll explore multiple SMA trading strategies in chapter 11. In that
chapter, we’ll also examine optimal time windows for trading strategies and
investigate whether standard parameters, such as the SMA 50 versus the SMA
200, are optimal.
Let’s look at Bollinger Bands next to understand better how we can show overbought
or oversold conditions more clearly.
BOLLINGER  BANDS
Bollinger Bands  is a popular technical analysis tool that measures price volatility and
identifies overbought or oversold conditions in a security. They use the following
parameters:
Middle band —This is a 20-period SMA, representing the average price over the
chosen period. The default value is 20, and traders can adjust it. Too high or too
low values risk being overly sensitive or not responsive enough to trading signals. 
Moving Average Ribbon
140
120
100
80
60Price
2024-01 2024-03 2024-05 2024-07 2024-09 2024-11
Date2025-01Price
SMA 10
SMA 20
SMA 30
SMA 40
SMA 50
SMA 60
Figure 10.21 Moving average ribbons that contract around 2024-05 and 2024-10, indicating that the market 
was consolidating at that time

261 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
Upper band —This equals the middle band plus two times the standard deviation
of price, representing a level often seen as overbought or a resistance area.
Lower band —This equals the middle band minus two times the standard devia-
tion of price, representing a level typically considered oversold or a support
area.
Let’s use Python code to plot Bollinger Bands and then interpret them. We collect
technical data from a stock and calculate the bands with the parameters defined in
listing 10.4. We first load stock tickers. Then, we define 20 as the default window and
calculate the necessary values for the bands described in the preceding list. Lastly, we
plot the Bollinger Bands.
import yfinance as yf
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
ticker = "NVDA"
data = yf.download(ticker, start="2024-01-01")
window = 20                                   
std_dev_factor = 2                            
data['SMA'] = data['Close'].rolling(
    window=sma_window_length).mean()          
rolling_std = data['Close'].rolling(
    window=sma_window_length).std()           
data['rf'] = (rolling_std * std_dev_factor)   
data['upper'] =  data['SMA'] + data['rf']     
data['lower'] =  data['SMA'] - data['rf']     
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
plt.plot(data.index, data['Close'], label="Close Price", color="blue", 
linewidth=1)
plt.plot(data.index, data['SMA'], label=f"{window}-Day SMA", 
color="orange", linewidth=1.5)
plt.plot(data.index, data['upper'], label="Upper Bollinger Band", 
color="green", linestyle="--", linewidth=1)
plt.plot(data.index, data['lower'], label="Lower Bollinger Band", 
color="red", linestyle="--", linewidth=1)
plt.title(f"Bollinger Bands for {ticker} (20-day window)", fontsize=14)
plt.xlabel("Date", fontsize=12)
plt.ylabel("Price", fontsize=12)
plt.legend()
plt.grid(alpha=0.3)
plt.show()
Figure 10.22 shows the Bollinger Bands. The plot represents all the lines we’ve cre-
ated based on the preceding formulas. Now, we should see more evident upper and
lower barriers.Listing 10.4 Plotting Bollinger Bands
Calculates 
the bands

262 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
Bollinger Bands expand during periods of high volatility and contract during periods
of low volatility. Around August 2024, the closing price also exhibited significant fluc-
tuations. Typically, following periods of high volatility, we experience a phase of con-
traction, indicating a consolidation period and a potential breakout.
 Prices tend to stay within the band. We attempt to identify moments when it devi-
ates, which signals price action, potential trend continuation, or reversal. In late April
2024, the share price was below 80 and crossed the lower band, signaling a possible
buy opportunity. At the same time, around 2024-06, we have a sell signal. While buying
in April 2024 would have led to profits, the sell signal in June 2024 would have
resulted in losses if we hadn’t identified this as a strong uptrend, which likely would
have rendered the sell signal obsolete. 
 In chapter 11, we’ll test strategies using backtesting. But let’s move forward to the
next indicator.
MOVING  AVERAGE  CONVERGENCE  DIVERGENCE  (MACD)
The Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD)  is a momentum-based technical
indicator used to spot potential buying or selling opportunities in the market. It ana-
lyzes the relationship between two moving averages of a share price: the short-term
and long-term moving averages. Let’s examine the details of MACDs. As we can see,
we use different window sizes or periods to detect buy or sell signals:
MACD line —The difference between a short-term EMA and a long-term EMA.
Commonly, the 12-period EMA is subtracted from the 26-period EMA.
Figure 10.22 The Bollinger Bands for NVIDIA provide insight into potential days to buy or sell shares.

263 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
Signal line —A nine-period EMA of the MACD line, which is a trigger for buy or
sell signals.
Histogram —A visual representation of the difference between the MACD and
signal lines. When the histogram is above 0, the MACD line is above the signal
line, indicating bullish momentum. Conversely, when it’s below 0, bearish
momentum is indicated.
Let’s examine the code in listing 10.5. In the calculate_macd  method, we calculate
the EMA_12  and EMA_26  based on the close price. With that, we get the MACD  and, con-
sequently, the signal line. After calculating the MACD  parameter, we plot the MACD
chart using the method plot_macd .
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
def calculate_macd(data, short_window=12, long_window=26, signal_window=9):
    data['EMA_12'] = data['Close'].ewm(
        span=short_window, adjust=False).mean()      
    data['EMA_26'] = data['Close'].ewm(
        span=long_window, adjust=False).mean()       
    data['MACD'] = data['EMA_12'] - data['EMA_26']   
    data['Signal_Line'] = data['MACD'].ewm(
        span=signal_window, adjust=False).mean()     
    return data
def plot_macd(data):
    plt.figure(figsize=(12,6))
    plt.plot(data.index, data['MACD'], label='MACD', color='blue')
    plt.plot(data.index, data['Signal_Line'], 
      label='Signal Line', color='red')
    plt.bar(data.index, data['MACD'] - data['Signal_Line'], 
      label='Histogram', color='gray', alpha=0.5)
    plt.legend(loc='best')
    plt.title('MACD Indicator')
    plt.xlabel('Date')
    plt.ylabel('MACD Value')
    plt.grid()
    plt.show()
import yfinance as yf
ticker = "NVDA"
df = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(start="2024-01-01")
df = calculate_macd(df)
plot_macd(df)
We obtain the data from NVIDIA in a chart, as shown in figure 10.23. We can then
examine historical buy and sell signals.
 Buy and sell signals are identified by crossover signals. We have a bullish signal
when the MACD line crosses above the signal line. We see them before March 2024Listing 10.5 Moving Average Convergence Divergence
Calculates the 
MACD parameter

264 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
and again in May 2024. A bearish signal occurs when the MACD line crosses below the
signal line. This indicates downward momentum and may suggest a potential selling
opportunity, particularly near or around April 2024. We also need to examine the
zero-line crossings and conclude that the sentiment was more bearish in March 2025
than in March 2024.
 The larger the histogram bars grow, the more it suggests increasing momentum in
the current trend. Shrinking bars indicate weakening momentum, which might hint
at an impending reversal.
 Understanding MACD can be particularly useful if you build or use algorithmic
trading systems. While MACD is a powerful tool, it’s not foolproof. It may produce
false signals in choppy or sideways markets. For confirmation, it’s best used with other
indicators or fundamental analysis.
 In chapter 11, we’ll also examine how we can back-test such strategies and how
much money we would have made or lost if we had used this strategy for buying or
selling. Let’s explore the next technical indicator.
10.2.3 Ichimoku Cloud
The Ichimoku Cloud (or just Ichimoku) is a charting technique used in technical
analysis that provides a comprehensive view of price action by incorporating trend,
momentum, and support and resistance levels in a single chart. Unlike SMAs or can-
dlesticks, the Ichimoku offers a multidimensional approach to understanding market
conditions.
MACD Indicator
10
8
6
4
2
0
−2
−4MACD Value
2024-01 2024-03 2024-05 2024-07 2024-09 2024-11 2025-01 2025-03
DateMACD
Signal Line
Histogram
Figure 10.23 Shows the MACD for NVIDIA closing prices. Whenever a signal line crosses the MACD, a trading 
signal is generated.

265 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
NOTE The Ichimoku Cloud often uses Japanese terms for its key elements.
They have been omitted from this book for clarity and brevity. You can look
them up on Investopedia or similar sites.
Although it may appear complex initially, breaking it down into its components makes
it much easier to understand. The Ichimoku consists of five key elements:
Conversion line —A short-term moving average that reacts quickly to price changes
Baseline —A medium-term trend line used as a momentum and trend direction
Leading span A —Forms the first boundary of the cloud, acting as dynamic sup-
port or resistance
Leading span B —Forms the second boundary of the cloud
Lagging span —Helps confirm trends by comparing the current price to past prices
We adjust the time windows for the averages accordingly. The conversion line has a
lower window (nine days), and the baseline has longer time windows. We also use the
base and conversion lines to calculate other lines, as demonstrated in the code. 
 Let’s implement the Ichimoku using Python and Matplotlib in listing 10.6. We
reload the NVIDIA data, calculate all parameters, and then plot them.
import yfinance as yf
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
ticker = "NVDA"
data = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(start="2024-01-10", end="2025-01-15")
df = pd.DataFrame(data).dropna()
df.reset_index(inplace=True)
df["ConversationLine"] = (df["Close"].rolling(
  window=9).max() + df["Close"].rolling(
  window=9).min()) / 2                                  
df["BaseLine"] = (df["Close"].rolling(
  window=26).max() + df["Close"].rolling(
  window=26).min()) / 2                                 
df["SpanA"] = ((df["ConversationLine"] 
                + df["BaseLine"]) / 2).shift(26)        
df["SpanB"] = ((df["Close"].rolling(
               window=52).max() + df["Close"].rolling(
               window=52).min()) / 2).shift(26)         
df["LaggingSpan"] = df["Close"].shift(-26)              
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
plt.plot(df.index, df["Close"], label="Close Price", color="black")
plt.plot(df.index, df["ConversationLine"], label="ConversationLine", 
color="red")
plt.plot(df.index, df["BaseLine"], label="BaseLine", color="blue")
plt.fill_between(df.index, df["SpanA"], df["SpanB"], 
  where=df["SpanA"] >= df["SpanA"], color="lightgreen", alpha=0.5)
plt.fill_between(df.index, df["SpanA"], df["SpanB"], 
  where=df["SpanA"] < df["SpanB"], color="lightcoral", alpha=0.5)Listing 10.6 Creating an Ichimoku
Calculates the 
parameter for 
the Ichimoku

266 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
plt.plot(df.index, df["LaggingSpan"], label="LaggingSpan", color="purple", 
linestyle="dotted")
plt.title("Ichimoku Cloud")
plt.legend()
plt.show()
Now, let’s look at the plot results in figure 10.24. We can see that we had essentially a
bullish momentum, as evidenced by the many green (light gray in grayscale) clouds.
The space between spans A and B forms the Ichimoku Cloud, and green (light gray in
grayscale) means that span A is above span B. It’s a bullish signal. If span B is above
span A, the cloud is red (dark gray in grayscale), a bearish signal.
 The cloud acts as support in an uptrend and resistance in a downtrend. We can use
them to identify trends:
If the price is above the cloud, the market is in an uptrend.
If the price is below the cloud, the market is in a downtrend.
If the price is inside the cloud, the market is in a consolidation phase
(uncertainty).
We can also look for buy and sell signals:
Bullish signal (Buy) —When the conversion line crosses above the baseline while
the price is above the cloud
Figure 10.24 An Ichimoku for NVIDIA closing prices indicating multiple bullish moments

267 10.3 Visualization with Streamlit
Bearish signal (Sell) —When the conversion line crosses below the baseline while
the price is below the cloud
The cloud acts as support in uptrends and resistance in downtrends. A thicker cloud
suggests stronger support or resistance, making it harder for the price to break through.
10.3 Visualization with Streamlit
In certain situations, it can be beneficial to visualize results online. Although some of
you may have experience with advanced web technologies, others may not want to
delve into a powerful but complex solution. We need a technology that keeps visual-
ization simple and straightforward.
 One way to quickly generate web UIs is to use the Streamlit library, which can be
installed as a Python package. Streamlit allows us to define web controls, and once we
execute the Python files, it generates a local web page. Note that we use traditional
Python files in the following example (ending with the .py extension), not the data
science notebooks used throughout the rest of the book.
 Listing 10.7 provides a simple example of plotting returns. We have multiple pre-
defined tickers and define input controls to collect the start and end times of the plot.
The code’s logic checks whether one or more stocks have been selected. If we have
the data, we calculate the returns and plot a line chart. 
import streamlit as st
import pandas as pd
import yfinance as yf
st.title("Finance Dashboard")
tickers = ('TSLA', 'AAPL', 'MSFT', 'ETH-USD', 'BTC-USD')
dropdown = st.multiselect("Select Ticker", tickers)
start = st.date_input('Start Date', pd.to_datetime('2024-01-01'))
end = st.date_input('End Date', pd.to_datetime('today'))
def relativeret(df):
    rel = df.pct_change()
    cumret = (1+rel).cumprod() -1
    cumret = cumret.fillna(0)
    return cumret
if len (dropdown) > 0:
    df = relativeret(yf.download(dropdown, start=start, end=end))['Close']
    st.header(f"Returns of {dropdown}")
    st.line_chart(df)
We start the Streamlit website by calling the Streamlit application on the command
line using the syntax streamlit  run <pythonfile> . We need to open our web browser
and follow the directions in the command line to view a figure similar to the one dis-
played in figure 10.25.Listing 10.7 Displaying returns with Streamlit 

268 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
Now that we understand the principles of Streamlit, we can plot moving average rib-
bons, Bollinger Bands, MACDs, and candlesticks. In the code shown in listing 10.8, we
use select boxes instead of multi-select controls, as in the previous examples, because
we’ll always examine one company at a time. Be aware that this listing omits the logic
for Bollinger Bands, MACDs, and moving average ribbons, as it’s identical to the code
previously shown in the listings and has been incorporated into methods. The com-
plete code for this chapter, as well as the code for the other chapters, is available for
download from the Manning site for this book. We added the technique to display a
plot from the Streamlit library, mplfinance, for the candles. As with mplfinance, you
Figure 10.25 The returns of Apple and Tesla in a chart rendered on a website by Streamlit

269 10.3 Visualization with Streamlit
need to pass a specific parameter, returnfig=True,  so that the plots can be plotted
correctly. To display a selected chart, we pass a method parameter to the method and
call it to create the plot, which will then be plotted.
import streamlit as st
import pandas as pd
import yfinance as yf
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import mplfinance as mpf
st.title("Technical Analysis")
ptype = ('NONE', 'MA', 'BOLL', 'MACD', 'CANDLE', 'CLOUD')
tickers = ('TSLA', 'AAPL', 'MSFT', 'ETH-USD', 'BTC-USD')
dropdown = st.selectbox("Select Ticker", tickers)
plot = st.selectbox("Select Plot", ptype)
start = st.date_input('Start Date', pd.to_datetime('2024-01-01'))
end = st.date_input('End Date', pd.to_datetime('today'))
def bollinger(data):
    pass
def macd(data):
    pass
def ma(data):
    pass
def cloud(data):
    pass
def candle(data):
    fig, ax = mpf.plot(data, type='candle', 
style='charles',figsize=(15,10), title='Candlestick Chart', returnfig=True)
    return fig 
def plot_ta(title: str, method):    
    st.header(title)                
    plt = method(df)                
    st.pyplot(plt)                  
if len (dropdown) > 0 and plot != 'NONE':
    df = yf.Ticker(dropdown).history(start=start, end=end)
    match(plot):
        case 'BOLL':
            plot_ta("Bollinger bands", bollinger)
        case 'MA':
            plot_ta("Moving Average Ribbons", ma)
        case 'MACD':
            plot_ta("MACD", macd)
        case 'CANDLE':
            plot_ta("CANDLE", candle)
        case 'CLOUD':
            plot_ta("CLOUD", cloud)Listing 10.8 Streamlit Technical Analysis
Method to plot 
the chart

270 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
In figure 10.26, we can see a reference example of the result using Bollinger Bands. If
you run the Streamlit application downloadable from the GitHub repository for this
book, you’ll also be able to plot other charts.
Figure 10.26 A Streamlit web page displaying Bollinger Bands

271 Summary
To sum it all up, even if you’re not a technical trader who identifies buy or sell opportu-
nities based on chart patterns, charts can help you understand better how share prices
are evolving. You can use charts to identify potential weak points in your portfolio and
combine this analysis with a reevaluation of your investment thesis for the stock.
Summary
Every chart tells a story. If you plot the share price development of an asset,
you’ll also see the effect of catalysts—events that propel significant changes in
asset prices.
You need to put price movements into context. For some asset classes, you
expect more or less volatility than for others.
You can look for patterns in a chart to predict future development.
Patterns, such as the double top, serve as a reference example. These patterns
can reveal a trend, but identifying them can be tricky, as they are merely tem-
plates of the past.
Chart patterns can be categorized into two main groups: reversals and continu-
ations. The first follows a trend and then reverses it; the second continues to fol-
low a trend.
Treemaps of a full stock market, popularized by platforms such as Finviz, pro-
vide a comprehensive overview of all constituents within the stock market.
Bar charts allow the display of the distribution of participants in a group. You
can visualize the assets within an exchange-traded fund (ETF) weighted by
their size.
Histograms are ideal for plotting daily returns. If their returns follow a Gaussian
distribution, everything is in order.
Scatterplots can be used to detect specific assets within a group of assets.
Candlesticks provide insights into market trends and movements during the
period represented by a candle.
A candlestick body represents the price difference between the security’s open-
ing and closing prices. The wicks of a candlestick identify the maximum and
minimum price during a trading day.
We can identify patterns across multiple trading days using candlesticks and
name trends. Some prominent patterns in candlesticks that identify trends are
Doji (opening and closing prices are almost the same), Hammer (possible
reversal after a downtrend), and Engulfing (a substantial shift in momentum).
You can calculate averages in many ways; some approaches weigh values
differently:
– Use simple moving averages (SMAs) for long-term trend analysis.
– Use exponential moving averages (EMAs) for momentum and recent changes.
– Use weighted moving averages (WMAs) for fast-moving signals.
– Use Hull moving averages (HMAs) for lag reduction with smoothness.

272 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
Moving average ribbons are a way to plot multiple moving averages with differ-
ent time windows over the closing price of a stock.
If moving average ribbons contract, we can identify a consolidation in the share
price.
Use Bollinger Bands to analyze volatility and price extremes, as they can be eas-
ily detected when they cross the upper and lower bands plotted in the chart.
Moving average convergence divergence (MACD) measures the relationship
between two moving averages of a share price. Use MACD for momentum and
crossovers.
Traders look for crossovers in such charts, as they serve as trading signals to buy
or sell stocks.
Streamlit is an excellent way for Python programmers to visualize content on a
web page without needing to learn web programming.

273Algorithmic trading
Now that you’ve mastered technical analysis with charts, this chapter introduces
algorithms for trading strategies, transforming raw insights into actions. This step
is the culmination of everything we’ve covered: collecting data, analyzing ratios
and charts, assessing risks, and integrating machine learning (ML) and large lan-
guage models (LLMs). We’ll bring it all together and outline scenarios for apply-
ing it.
 Various scenarios affect trading strategies. Some algorithms perform better in
bull markets than bear markets, or vice versa. Catalysts are specific moments that
signal more volatility in the market, which can be an opportunity or risk. We’ll
review catalysts from a trading perspective.This chapter covers
Quantitative analysis
Testing strategies using backtesting
Catalysts as game changers
The difference between exchanges and brokers
Executing orders with Python
Order types and modalities

274 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
 In the third part of this chapter, we’ll demonstrate how to place orders program-
matically using Interactive Brokers and Alpaca. We’ll explore different order types,
parameters, and their implications, learning how to apply them effectively.
11.1 Nonfinancial data
In chapter 3, we categorized data for financial analysis. In chapters 4 and 5, we con-
ducted ad hoc research to build portfolios. Then, we showed how to monitor our port-
folio, explored ML and LLM applications, and analyzed charts. As shown in figure 11.1,
three data sources, including their update frequencies, are used to create data models
and algorithms for trading decisions. The efficient market theory says that an asset
price represents the knowledge of all investors, and therefore, individual investors
can’t beat the market in the long run. But what if we get insights that nobody else or
only a few investors have? We won’t likely find these hidden gems of knowledge in fun-
damental or technical data, as investors have tried to explore financial data for
decades. Let’s focus on the nonfinancial data, as this category is the newest source for
insights, and not everyone might have explored all possibilities.
Let’s explore how much data has changed the investment approach to understand
how nonfinancial data has added a new flavor to investment and trading strategies.
Many investors have read about investment basics from books about Warren Buffett,
who often refers to his mentor, Benjamin Graham, as the father of sophisticated
investment techniques. If we read classic books by Graham such as Security Analysis
Fundamental Data Technical Data Nonﬁnancial data
Seconds
Seconds/Minutes Months
Figure 11.1 Three types of data flow can lead to insights, and nonfinancial data, 
being the newest of them, is especially interesting.

275 11.1 Nonfinancial data
or The Intelligent Investor , we can imagine a young Warren Buffett getting his informa-
tion from newspapers and seeing him and his partner, Charlie Munger, making
deals in person with other investors in the pre-information age. We can hardly imag-
ine an investment legend such as Warren Buffett in front of a Bloomberg terminal
studying data or exploring Python scripts using an Integrated Development Envi-
ronment (IDE).
 Films such as Wall Street  or The Big Short  can also influence perceptions of the
investment profession. These films feature computers already in use for trading. Many
documentaries and movies also illustrate an era when the internet was a game
changer, allowing us to respond to fast-moving signals that would have taken earlier
investors significantly more time to uncover.
 The time between Warren Buffett’s early years (think of investing without comput-
ers) and trading stocks around the financial crisis in 2008 (think of investors looking
at a screen at green or red charts) shows how digitalization changed for investors.
What may be less obvious is how much has changed since the early information age.
In the millennium years, it was unimaginable that one person’s statement in the
media could cause share prices in the world to fall or rise by more than 10%.
 The effect on share prices after President Donald Trump changed US tariff poli-
cies has confronted everyone with a new reality: data originating outside the world of
finance—social media posts can, after all, be collected in real time and added to trad-
ing algorithms as a decision factor—sometimes affects share prices more than finan-
cial data. In the future, we might screen social media for significant messages like we
study charts for investment decisions.
 Social media data is just one subcategory of the generic nonfinancial data category.
Let’s explore more categories of nonfinancial data to help us gain insights about pos-
sible share price movements. When exploring different categories of nonfinancial
data, we’ll discover that one difference between financial and nonfinancial data is that
different categories of nonfinancial data sources have different relevance for various
sectors and industries. Social media data is, in most cases, more relevant to consumer-
oriented companies than companies that focus on business-to-business (B2B) solu-
tions. This separates nonfinancial from financial data sources because the latter
includes sources that everyone must provide. In other words, serious investors might
skip social media analysis but not numbers in the balance sheets.
Structured trend analysis
Controversial topics make some debaters’ blood boil. Let’s take nuclear energy as a
reference. Opponents claim that building nuclear power plants takes a long time and
is costly. They also warn about the dangers of atomic meltdowns and raise concerns
that nuclear waste threatens future generations. Proponents of nuclear energy praise
the constant flow of energy as an addition to the volatile energy from renewables and
advocate for the energy density of nuclear power plants.

276 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
11.1.1 Big data by example
Beyond fundamentals and technicalities, additional data sources will broaden our per-
spective on asset investability. This exploration leads to many different data sources
and use cases, which we can group by sectors and industries. They are more complex
to use than the data that is available out of the box. An overview of the possibilities of
enriching data models with financial data can still be beneficial, as access to rare data
in a treasury may be the differentiator that determines profit or loss.
Investment management company Renaissance Technologies (RenTech) started col-
lecting data early, which may be one reason for its success. Still, we shouldn’t collect
data for the sake of collecting data. We need to develop an investment thesis, and
once we’ve explored all the fundamentals, we need to consider what additional infor-
mation is required to validate our thesis. Next, we examine how to obtain the data.
 We can hypothesize that Google’s share price will soar in the upcoming years due
to Waymo. Some may even speculate that Waymo’s success will affect Google like the
iPhone did Apple. We can read up on articles stating that Waymo could become a
cash cow. But articles are just one-time opinions. We need to find data sources that
prove the growing importance of Waymo: (continued)
If you put opponents and proponents in a room, the chances are high that debates
will be heated. Those who fight for their cause want to win debates, either out of
years-long conviction that has blinded them or because they represent a lobby. You
might not gain any meaningful insights if you listen to debates.
Investors can explore trends instead by using nonfinancial data: How many new
nuclear power plants are being built? How many papers about nuclear energy have
been written? What do research papers say about the future energy demands of data
centers? How do the prices of companies on the stock exchange that focus on
nuclear energy change? Collecting that information is feasible and can be added as
a factor to algorithms.
Is big data equal to a big company?
Many data sources can help us gain valuable insights. For example, satellite imagery
or data from telecommunications providers can reveal movement trends. But does
this mean we need to be part of a large corporation to access such data?
Not necessarily. Some datasets are available for purchase through marketplaces
such as AWS Data Exchange or Snowflake Marketplace. If you’re a programmer devel-
oping analytical models, selected paid external data sources can be useful. However,
because we don’t want to require you to subscribe to commercial data services, this
section remains more theoretical than others in this book.

277 11.1 Nonfinancial data
Hard facts on the number of drives per week
Rollouts of new Waymo services to new cities
Reduced number of reports on robotaxi accidents
Let’s see how we can collect this information. The sections are intended to give you
some ideas on how to add specific details to your models. In some cases, this also
means investing in external data sources, as many insights might not be available
through free data sources.
MEDIA
We get most of the media information from the web. We can collect information from
various sources, such as social media, traditional media, and blog posts, using crawlers
and APIs. We can also transcribe video data to text.
 We can learn more about trends using a vast pool of information on Waymo: Is
Waymo mentioned more often over time? In what context is Waymo mentioned? How
positive was the mood when people talked about Waymo? Are the deployments to new
cities on time?
NOTE Human emotions are a category of nonfinancial data. The CBOE
Volatility Index (VIX) is a popular measure of the stock market’s expecta-
tion of volatility based on S&P 500 index options. There are many engaging
scenarios matching sentiments in the media with price changes from that
index.
MOVEMENT  DATA
We can use geolocation and movement data to explore what is happening in an area.
Using satellite and webcam images, we can count objects, such as different car brands
on the streets, if we have computer vision skills. Knowing the growth rate of Waymo
cars in certain areas will give us additional insights into their overall success.
 You might wonder if collecting and analyzing “exotic data” is worth the additional
effort. Even with the vast amount of satellite data available, running computer vision
algorithms and training models to identify specific objects correctly requires signifi-
cantly more effort than exploring mainstream data.
 The efficient market theory says that the share prices of one company represent
the total information available to all investors. Engineers who find ways to collect and
analyze data not available to everyone may have a way to get a competitive advantage
as investors. Never underestimate the value of “underrepresented” data.
DEMOGRAPHIC  DATA
Demographic data tells you about the demands of a population. As a long-term inves-
tor, you see more demand for hearing aids than for skateboards if statistics tell you
that the population in an area is aging.
 The demand for Waymo services may follow demographic developments. Autono-
mous driving can be popular with teenagers who aren’t allowed to drive themselves,
and it can even be an incentive for them to postpone a driver’s license if they start

278 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
using robotaxis. Think also about handicapped and older adults who might face chal-
lenges driving themselves. 
 One core thesis is that using robotaxis is part of a mindset shift, and that we can
detect this mindset shift in people. If we evaluate the data, we can gain insight into the
behavior of target groups.
11.2 Catalysts
In finance, a catalyst  is a trigger that propels the price of a stock dramatically up or
down. Earning reports, new analyst ratings on stocks, product announcements, legisla-
tive changes, lawsuits, mergers and acquisitions, bankruptcy declarations, and the
involvement of activist investors are good examples.
 A catalyst is an opportunity to buy or sell positions when we expect the share price
to change more than usual. Anyone interested in quantitative or algorithmic trading
may focus on specific catalysts and build models specifically created for them.
11.2.1 Mergers and acquisitions
Nothing lasts forever, and everything with a beginning also has an end. In business as
in life, growth is followed by maturity, saturation, and eventually decline. Some see the
cycle of life and rebirth even as a philosophical principle far beyond business. One
principle is that, in the end, everything is just a transformation. Figure 11.2 outlines a
business life cycle with multiple phases. Imagine a company that has a stunning prod-
uct idea. As it enters the market, many customers want to own that product, and this
company grows and reaches maturity.
Many companies face competitors over time unless they have a strong economic moat.
New rivals enter the market, and at some point, the sales growth of key products starts
to slow down. Everyone is clear that without a new hit, the company will be unable to
keep up with its past performance.IntroductionGrowthMaturity
Saturation
DeclineRebirth
TimeStage progressionFigure 11.2 How companies 
might evolve. The shaded 
area marks a window of 
opportunity. A merger or 
acquisition can rescue a 
company in decline.

279 11.2 Catalysts
Some companies may lack the resources to revive themselves in a market saturated
with competitors. Maybe they’ve lost too much money to have a proper R&D budget
for the next big thing in their products and services. In the corporate world, mergers
and acquisitions (M&A)  are one strategy to prevent decline if you don’t have enough
resources to reinvent yourself. The executives may see a chance for an early revival by
joining forces with another company, either by merging or by acquisition.
 The idea of a merger is 1 + 1 = 3 ; that is, the combined entity with all possible syn-
ergies is more potent than the sum of its parts. By merging two companies with com-
plementary products, they expand their offerings and streamline operations. An
acquisition is more one-sided: a larger company absorbs a smaller one, integrating it
into its structure, for example, Microsoft acquiring GitHub while keeping it distinct
within its corporate structure.
 For investors, M&A events represent both opportunities and risks. When a com-
pany is announced to be acquired, its stock price often surges, benefiting existing
shareholders. If two public companies merge, investors might see long-term value cre-
ation. Most mergers look excellent on paper, but what happens when two distinct cor-
porate cultures, operational systems, and management styles clash? What if employees
resist the integration? Not all M&As deliver the expected value; some even destroy
shareholder wealth instead of creating it.
NOTE An investor might assume that the executives will prevent a merger if
they believe a cultural mismatch exists. For some executives, an exit is a suc-
cessful end of an era, and all the troubles will be passed on to a successor.
Therefore, whether all executives involved in a merger or acquisition always
have altruistic goals in mind is doubtful.
We can build models that focus on M&As and try to determine the key parameters that
indicate success or failure. In the preceding section, we talked about nonfinancial data.
Many data sources tell us if an M&A is successful. We can, for instance, analyze senti-
ment data in blog posts and comments. We might find the insights we need if we can
access data from LinkedIn, Glassdoor, or other providers of employees’ sentiment.
11.2.2 Companies in distress
“Cigar butt investing” is an investment strategy famously associated with Warren Buf-
fett’s early years, inspired by his mentor Benjamin Graham. It’s like finding a dis-
c a r d e d  c i g a r  o n  t h e  g r o u n d ,  t a k i n g  o n e  l a s t  f r e e  p u f f ,  a n d  t h r o w i n g  i t  a w a y .  I t ’ s  a
hazardous approach, and Warren Buffett abandoned it. Still, there’s an opportunity to
make money.
 You need to find cheap, discarded assets. You look for deeply undervalued compa-
nies, often ignored or struggling, but still have some potential. You buy the stock at a
deep discount, wait for a slight rebound, and then sell at a profit. Once the market
recognizes the company’s fair value and the stock price rises slightly, sell it before its
deeper problems surface.

280 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
 This strategy is like hacking together an old repository to get a quick fix—it can
work, but it’s risky, inefficient, and not a long-term plan. You look for companies that
are close to bankruptcy and explore all the data to find out if there’s a way this com-
pany can be bought or rebound. Figure 11.3 shows the workflow of a company in dis-
tress. The later an investor gets involved, the more risk they face.
You can look for companies that filed for bankruptcy. Some may have a stalking horse
agreement , which is a binding purchase agreement between a seller (often in bank-
ruptcy or financial distress) and an initial bidder. This agreement sets the floor price
and terms for an asset sale in a competitive bidding process, ensuring the asset isn’t
sold for too little. Many shareholders might want to liquidate their positions because of
a bankruptcy, fearing they could lose everything. If you believe that a company in dis-
tress is interesting enough and that competitors are interested in acquiring it, you can
buy when the share price is at its bottom and try your luck. Just be aware that this can go
wrong, even with intensive research, and you might lose these assets completely.
WARNING Y o u ’ l l  f i n d  s o m e  e x a m p l e s  o f  c o m p a n i e s  t h a t  w e n t  b a n k r u p t  y e t
managed a turnaround, generating huge gains for risk-taking investors. Just
keep in mind, these cases are rare—in most bankruptcies, equity is wiped out
as creditors assume ownership.
11.2.3 Earnings calls
Every company has quarterly earnings calls, during which executives discuss the past
quarter. Depending on the company, stocks can move quite a lot. The central ques-
tion is whether the company met its earnings expectations. If so, how big was the sur-
prise, positive or negative? Executives might also discuss many topics during earningsCompany is
in distress.
Company goes
bankrupt.
Company is closed.Company is reopened.
Figure 11.3 The workflow of a company in distress and its possible turnaround depending 
on its assets

281 11.2 Catalysts
calls besides earnings. Taking the transcript of an earnings call and running a senti-
ment analysis can be insightful. 
 One way to prepare for earnings calls is to start researching a few days before. For
example, you should explore when executives last acquired or sold their shares, which
could indicate a possible move. You can also find many online reports about new or
closed deals of that company to predict an earnings surprise , which refers to diverging
from the expected earnings.
 One question is whether to trigger an order during an earnings call or before-
hand. You can imagine that some investors might listen to the call for insights on pre-
pared orders to buy and sell; when a message indicates possible price movements, they
will place an order. So, if you have a strong intuition, you can buy or sell in advance. 
11.2.4 Disasters
The COVID-19 pandemic was a game changer on the stock market. The shares of
many companies fell rapidly. There were notable exceptions, however. Examining bio-
tech companies such as Moderna and Pfizer reveals significant profits, as evidenced by
their share price history.
 With every disaster, there are winners and losers. Natural catastrophes, such as
wildfires and hurricanes—we’ll see more of them thanks to climate change—may
challenge businesses, such as insurance companies. Companies that produce solu-
tions to mitigate catastrophes, such as companies that help with early wildfire detec-
tion, will benefit. Wars challenge the economies of countries that are involved,
directly or indirectly. Looking at the share prices of Rheinmetall, a German defense
industry company, underscores that there are also beneficiaries of wars.Earning calls strategies
If you’re bold, consider a leveraged purchase ahead of likely significant price move-
ments. If your broker allows leverage of, let’s say, $500,000, and you bet on a share
that rises by 10%, you’ll earn $50,000 in a day. However, you could also evaporate
$50,000 in one day if the price decreases by 10%. Many investors advise against
leveraged orders, even if they feel confident about the company’s performance. After
all, the market is unpredictable. NVIDIA has made numerous record-earning calls, yet
investors remain cautious, fearing that NVIDIA might be overvalued; if the gains fall
short of expectations, they may still decide to sell.
Another way of approaching earnings calls is to trade options instead of shares. They
provide leverage with lower up-front costs. If you buy options, your risk is clearly
defined, as you know in detail what you spend on your premium. You can also use
specific option strategies to net on increased volatility without predicting the exact
direction of the stock’s move. 
Primarily, if you focus on small and midsize companies, where more volatile and
more surprising developments are possible, trading options can feel like casino-
style gambling.

282 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
 You can generate profits by addressing potential upcoming disasters early. You can
use momentum or long-term strategies. To clarify the difference, let’s consider wild-
fires as an example. As a long-term investor, you buy shares of companies that help
prevent or mitigate wildfires. As climate change worsens, new disasters will boost
demand for these solutions. With momentum investing, you can short sell insurance
stocks before a major catastrophe happens. Predicting disasters is difficult. Any entre-
preneur who can develop such an innovative system will likely get even wealthier by
selling their services to governments.
11.2.5 Interest rate changes
The relationship between the federal interest rate and the share prices may be one
of new investors’ most overlooked parameters. We can learn a lot from the past.
Alan Greenspan was a Federal Reserve (aka Fed) director who aimed to keep the
interest rate low. If the federal interest rate is low, companies can borrow money
cheaply, leading to more investments and lower unemployment. Side effects of low
interest rates can be manias—some might remember the subprime mortgage crisis
of 2008, which was partly also triggered by the availability of cheap money, and
higher inflation.
 The Fed policies around COVID-19 are a good lesson about the effect of interest
rates on share prices. Biotech companies focusing on research, such as Moderna,
show a clear picture. During COVID, Moderna did well thanks to high earnings, but
the interest rates went up to curb inflation. The share prices of capital-intensive com-
panies, including Moderna, struggled after the pandemic.
 One strategy is buying capital-intensive shares when interest rates are high but
share prices are low. When the Fed lowers interest rates, the shares of capital-intensive
companies will likely go up. There’s a big catch, though. Some capital-intensive com-
panies that haven’t secured a stable cash inflow are at risk of bankruptcy during high
interest rates.
NOTE If you’re a freelancer programmer, you might have noticed that you
receive more offers on average when interest is low. Companies prefer not to
spend money when borrowing is expensive. LLM prompts such as “What is
the outlook for freelancers to get new gigs based on the current economic sit-
uation, and when will it improve?” can be used for deeper research.
11.3 Trading algorithms
By continuously screening for data spikes—such as shifts in public sentiment or
unusual price movements—we can establish rule-based trading strategies:
If X happens, we buy.
If Y happens, we sell.
The key is defining what X and Y are. X and Y must be quantifiable, as an algorithm
must determine if the buy or sell event has been reached.

283 11.3 Trading algorithms
 Before hunting for X and Y, let’s first focus on validating results. Any programmer
familiar with test-driven development (TDD) understands the importance of defining
validation criteria before implementing logic. Even the most sophisticated strategies
risk being unreliable or misleading without a solid validation framework.
11.3.1 Backtesting
Backtesting evaluates trading strategies using historical data. Let’s illustrate this con-
cept with an example. In the chapter on technical analysis, we explored moving aver-
ages and observed that a simple moving average (SMA) crossover can serve as a buy or
sell signal. This strategy involves calculating two SMAs with different time windows
based on a stock’s closing price:
When the shorter-period SMA crosses above the longer-period SMA, it signals
a buy.
When it crosses below, it signals a sell.
Let’s test this strategy with historical prices. To begin, we need generic methods.
The first step is adding SMA calculations to a DataFrame of historical prices. As we’ll
use SMAs with different time windows within a DataFrame, we must also validate if
the SMA with a specific time window has already been added, as shown in the follow-
ing snippet:
def add_sma(df: pd.DataFrame, lower: int, upper: int) -> pd.DataFrame:
    if f'sma_{lower}' not in df.columns:
        df[f'sma_{lower}'] = df.Close.rolling(lower).mean()
    if f'sma_{upper}' not in df.columns:
        df[f'sma_{upper}']  = df.Close.rolling(upper).mean()
    return df
Let’s explore the backtesting method shown in Listing 11.1. We pass a DataFrame con-
taining historical data loaded from a yfinance ticker object. Additionally, we specify
parameters for the lower and upper periods of the SMAs and the number of shares
to trade. We define a Boolean parameter to trigger a buy order on the first trading
day to make tests more comparable with other results.
NOTE In this backtesting strategy, we’ll sell or buy a predefined number of
shares. After one signal, we wait for a reverse signal as the following action,
and we don’t trigger the same signal twice in a row. We can repeat the same
orders in intervals, including short selling for advanced scenarios. We can
also adjust the number of shares to trade. But let’s keep things simple.
def backtest(df: pd.DataFrame, lower: int, upper: int, shares : int, 
  buy_first_day = False) -> pd.DataFrame:
    schema={'date': 'datetime64[ns]', 'action': 'str', 'cash_movement':
 'float64'}
    results = pd.DataFrame(columns=schema.keys()).astype(schema)Listing 11.1 Backtest

284 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
    if buy_first_day:
        results.loc[len(results)] = [df["Date"].iloc[0], "Buy", 
df["Close"].iloc[0] * shares * -1]
        waiting_for_bear = True
    else:
        waiting_for_bear = False
    for index, row in df.iterrows():
        if not waiting_for_bear:
            if row[f"sma_{lower}"] > row[f"sma_{upper}"]:
                results.loc[len(results)] = [row.Date, "Buy", 
                   row.Close * shares * -1]
                waiting_for_bear = True
        if waiting_for_bear:
            if row[f"sma_{lower}"] < row[f"sma_{upper}"]:
                results.loc[len(results)] = [row.Date, 
                                             "Sell", 
                                             row.Close * shares]
                waiting_for_bear = False
    if waiting_for_bear:
        results.loc[len(results)] = [df["Date"].iloc[-1], "Sell", 
df["Close"].iloc[-1] * shares]
    return results
Let’s run some tests. We want to use a fixed amount of money in a target currency as a
benchmark to compare the performance of different stocks. We calculate the number
of stocks to buy from this initial investment sum. The higher the share price, the fewer
shares we would buy.
 We need a baseline to measure our strategy’s success: the difference between the
shares bought on the first day of the plan and those sold on the last day of the strategy.
We also need to account for transaction costs. If we spend $1 for one transaction, we
can subtract the number of transactions from the total gains of our SMA strategy. If an
SMA strategy leads to better results than this, it’s successful.
Does company outlook matter?
In the following reference example, we start backtesting with NVIDIA. One argument
could be that using NVIDIA might not be a good choice, as NVIDIA has been one of
the most successful companies in recent years. Would it make more sense to use a
company whose performance is cyclical?
We’ll look at more companies in this chapter, but starting with a successful one helps
us establish a baseline. People who follow long-term investment strategies try to pick
companies with a good outlook based on strong past earnings and economic moats.
Traditional long-term investors don’t touch their investments for years. So, what does
it mean if we learn that with a trading strategy, we can make the returns of a company
that already provides good returns even better?

285 11.3 Trading algorithms
We’ll execute a test for NVIDIA using $1,000 and calculate 10 years of data. In this first
test scenario shown in listing 11.2, we take 10 trading days for a lower SMA window
and 20 trading days for the upper time window.
def run_single_backtest(ticker: str, cash, start_date: str, end_date: str, 
transaction_costs = 1) -> pd.DataFrame:
    df = load_data(ticker, start_date, end_date)
    shares = round(cash / df["Close"][0])
    print(f"Shares: {shares}. start price: {df["Close"][0]}. end price: "
          f"{df["Close"].iloc[-1]}. to beat: {df["Close"].iloc[-1]*shares – 
                                                 df["Close"][0]*shares – 
                                                 transaction_costs}")
    df = add_sma(df, 10, 20)
    res = backtest(df, 10, 20, shares, True)
    gain = res['cash_movement'].sum()
    gain = gain - transaction_costs * len(res['cash_movement'])
    print(f"Gains: {gain})")
    return df
results_nvda
 = run_single_backtest("NVDA", 1000, "2015-01-01", "2025-01-01")
Looking into the console output, we can buy 2,070 shares on January 1, 2015. We cal-
culate that this leads to a performance to beat of $276,980, which is quite impressive
for 10 years. There’s a small caveat, though, that we need to highlight: NVIDIA went
through stock splits. This means the initial NVIDIA stocks at the beginning of January
1, 2015, didn’t cost $0.48.
 Running this simulation, it turns out that an SMA10/SMA20 crossover strategy is
unsuccessful. We would have made $177,960 in 10 years, clearly below $276,980.
 Let’s see if we can do better with other time window parameters. To do this, let’s
create a DataFrame that provides parameter combinations:
x = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(10, 210, 10))
test_params = pd.merge(x,x,how='cross')
test_params.columns = ['sma_lower','sma_upper']
test_params = test_params[test_params.sma_lower < test_params.sma_upper]
We can now adjust the method to run the same test with various time windows, start-
ing with 10 (the lowest) and 200 (the highest). Listing 11.3 shows the same logic as
with single runs, just with a for loop in between that uses all configurations.We’ll contrast this strategy of using NVIDIA with other companies and then see if we
can develop a more generic idea of whether trading algorithms make sense. One small
spoiler alert: the answer is—as you might have expected—it depends. For decades,
traders and investors have debated whether sophisticated trading strategies lead to
better investment results, and so far, there’s no clear winner in this debate.
Listing 11.2 Executing a single backtest

286 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
def run_multiple_backtests(ticker, investment_sum = 1000):
    schema={'lower': 'int64', 'upper': 'int64', 'gain': 'float64'}
    results = pd.DataFrame(columns=schema.keys()).astype(schema)
    df = load_data(ticker, start_date)
    shares = round(investment_sum / df["Close"][0])
    print(f"Shares: {shares}. start price: {df["Close"][0]}. end price: "
          f"{df["Close"].iloc[-1]}. to beat: {df["Close"].iloc[-1]*shares –
             df["Close"][0]*shares}")
    for n,m in test_params.values:
        df = add_sma(df, n, m)
        res = backtest(df, n, m, shares)
        gain = res['change'].sum()
        results.loc[len(results)] = [n, m, gain]
    sorted_results = results.sort_values(by='gain', ascending=False)
    return sorted_results
ticker = "NVDA"res_nvda = run_multiple_backtests(ticker, 
    investment_sum = 1000)
res_nvda
While we learned that a setup using SMA10 and SMA20 doesn’t beat the baseline for
our initial test, a different setup does. Table 11.1 shows the five best results for
NVIDIA. With a maximum of $309,821.27, we can beat the strategy of buying low on
the first trading day and selling high later.
Let’s test this code with other company data. As we show in table 11.2, this strategy
worked four out of five times using the best parameters. Again, there are some uncer-
tainties. If on the first trading day—when the algorithm needs to purchase shares—
the share prices were at a peak but were at a low on the selling day, we might have a
distorted result. 
 An SMA crossover strategy doesn’t beat the baseline for every asset. It’s also essen-
tial to highlight that, depending on the brokers we use, we might need to adjust the
transaction costs per order. One parameter that we haven’t touched at all is taxation.
Every time you sell, you create capital appreciation, which can be taxable depending
on your residency.Listing 11.3 Executing multiple backtests
Table 11.1 The results of various SMA crossover strategies for 10 years of NVIDIA historical 
share prices
SMA low window SMA high window Gains ($)
90 120 309,821.27
100 110 301,097.67
60 160 300,504.11
50 110 298,242.05"
50 180 297,201.84"

287 11.3 Trading algorithms
NOTE If you prefer to code less, you might look at platforms such as World-
Quant BRAIN. These platforms often provide data and a scripting language
to define alpha candidates based on logic, such as our if statements in the
code. Users can also trigger automated backtests. For some, their approach
looks like shooting with cannons at data. From a pool of potential candidates,
select well-defined buy and sell conditions and test them until you find condi-
tions that have been successful in the past. Compute or license costs may
apply when using these platforms.
In the next section, we’ll also address another detail that can affect the outcome of
these backtests. In these backtests, we buy using the close price, but the question is
the price we might get. Stock prices are volatile during the day, and there’s always a
spread between the ask and bid price, meaning we might not get the theoretically
best price. 
 In the next section, we’ll explore how to buy and sell stocks at a minimum price
using limit orders. Before we go into the details of orders, let’s close the topic of algo-
rithmic trading by looking into complex rules.
11.3.2 Complex trading signals
To illustrate basic algorithmic trading, we used an SMA crossover strategy to find prof-
itable trading signals. Let’s explore alternative trading signals to decide whether to
buy or sell shares.
 We use two clauses in our Python code to decide whether to buy or sell shares. If
we replace if row[f"sma_{lower}"]  > row[f"sma_{upper}"]  with a method isBuy-
Signal(args) , and exchange the clause to sell in the same way, we can host a more com-
plex logic to evaluate buy and sell decisions.
 We can screen data for trading signals daily or even in a shorter time. These signals
don’t have to be related directly to the company whose shares we trade. We might also
evaluate indicators that indicate geopolitical challenges (e.g., if a president announces
another round of tariffs, we might be inclined to sell assets that would be affected by
it). Let’s define quantifiable trading signals as method declarations as reference
examples. These trading signals can also be combined with technical indicators
such as the SMA:Table 11.2 The results of running the backtests with shares of some companies
Ticker Lower SMA Upper SMA Gain ($) To beat
KO 100 110 664 1,042
MMM 120 190 810 310
PFE 110 180 1243.55 312.55
AAPL 160 170 10,136.21 9258.81
MSFT 80 140 10,240.63 9514.61

288 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
def price_movement_score(assets:  list)  #—If the assets in the parameters
move positively, return a buy signal; otherwise, return a sell signal.
def keyword_score(channels:  list,  keywords:  list,  upper,  lower)  #—If the
score surpasses the upper threshold, buy; if it’s below the lower threshold, sell.
def insider_score()  #—This calculates a score based on insider trades (insti-
tutional investors or executives of a company buying or selling shares).
NOTE Investors trading with cryptocurrency can group cryptocurrency own-
ers by the number of tokens they hold as the blockchain is a public data
source that identifies holders with an ID. If traders who own a lot of tokens
unstake them, they are likely to sell them, which can be a strong sell signal.
We can collect and combine multiple scores from signals such as the preceding exam-
ples via a scorecard for decision-making. The precondition for each score is that it’s
quantifiable and comparable with earlier results.
We can experiment with different signal combinations and use backtesting algorithms
to see which combination of signals leads to the best results. Of course, we can also
collect the signals in an analytical data set, each signal represented in a column, and
using historical data, we can run supervised ML algorithms to train the model for
good trading strategies. As mentioned, ML algorithms have a high risk of overfitting,
and past results don’t always guarantee future results.
CAUTION Traders need to be aware of potential costs during trading. Slippage
is the difference between where the computer signaled the entry and exit for
a trade and where actual clients, with actual money, entered and exited the
market using the computer’s signals. In addition, transaction costs might add
up if we have frequent orders, and we must never forget that there’s a spread
for each trade.
We can increase the complexity by using parameters other than trading signals. For
instance, we can adjust the number of shares to trade based on decision parameters. IfComparable parameters and historical data
Using natural language processing, we can create sentiment scores for keywords
from text we collect from different sources. We can use a web crawler or APIs to col-
lect the content. Therefore, we can also determine how moods change if we keep
parsing the same sources over time. What yields a result one day can yield one
another day as well.
However, media sources change over time. We might even lose access to some and
gain access to new ones. The challenge is that the pool from which we collect data
changes over time; therefore, comparing new results with past results will be more
complex.

289 11.4 Orders
we have a higher risk tolerance, we can allow leverage to buy shares, meaning we
would borrow money to execute a transaction and use short-sell strategies.
 Entering advanced trading strategies using algorithms can be compared to enter-
ing professional boxing and the ability to challenge every fighter without restric-
tions. With a lot of training, you can win fights and get rich. But otherwise, if you
end up a bold lightweight amateur boxer challenging a heavyweight champion, you
can have regrets.
11.4 Orders
Let’s examine orders, as we want to trigger orders automatically using Python. We’ll
first discuss the difference between exchanges and brokers, and then we’ll explore the
two brokers’ APIs.
11.4.1 Exchanges vs. brokers
Figure 11.4 outlines what we’ve learned so far. Exchanges sell assets. With direct access
to an exchange, we can purchase from the source. However, we usually need a broker
to execute orders and hold our shares in the stock and bond markets. A stockbroker is
an intermediary between investors and exchanges.
Stockbrokers differ by the number of exchanges they support. They will likely support
popular US exchanges such as the NYSE or NASDAQ. Most will also support other
popular exchanges such as the DAX, London, or Nikkei. But what about emerging
markets? Not every broker supports every stock exchange from every country. Condi-
tions might differ for each exchange, which includes data actuality (some data is pro-
vided with delays) and fees.
 A crypto exchange differs fundamentally from a stock market exchange. For exam-
ple, following are some characteristics of a stock market exchange:
Stock market exchanges are highly regulated marketplaces where investors buy
and sell shares of public companies.Brokerage
BuyerBuyerBuyer
SellerSellerSellerExchange
BuyerBuyerBuyer
SellerSellerSeller
Figure 11.4 On an exchange, sellers and buyers can interact directly. A broker is an entity between a 
buyer and a seller. A broker usually facilitates trading on one or more exchanges.

290 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
A public company is listed on a primary stock exchange. For example, NVIDIA
is listed on the NASDAQ in the United States, which is regulated by the Securi-
ties and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Companies may also be traded on secondary stock exchanges—for instance,
NVIDIA shares can be traded on Frankfurt/Xetra—but investors globally can
trust that NVIDIA must comply with US regulations and undergo independent
audits required by its primary listing.
In contrast, crypto exchanges  are mostly private companies, often incorporated in tax
havens or jurisdictions with light financial oversight. As a result, individual govern-
ments typically can’t enforce the same regulatory protections as they do for public
companies. Investor protection is weak: users may have little legal recourse if an
exchange misuses customer funds or fails to maintain proper accounting.
 Some countries require crypto exchanges to establish local legal entities to serve
their citizens (e.g., within the European Union or Japan), introducing a degree of
governance and investor protection. However, the risk remains high, particularly for
global exchanges that operate in lightly regulated environments. Many investors have
lost substantial funds by trusting unregulated platforms or chasing speculative gains.
 The core function of a crypto exchange is to provide an online platform that
enables the trading of cryptocurrencies. Their APIs handle the following:
Placing and matching trades
Storing digital assets (custody)
Signing transactions on the underlying blockchains of each supported crypto-
currency
Unlike public company stocks, which are listed on a limited number of exchanges,
cryptocurrencies are typically available on most major crypto exchanges. This makes
them globally liquid but also subject to fragmented regulation and varying levels of
operational quality.
High-frequency trading
High-frequency trading (HFT)  uses algorithms and advanced technology to execute a
high volume of trades in fractions of a second, profiting from small price inefficiencies
or arbitrage opportunities. If done right, a trader can benefit from tiny price move-
ments and liquidity provisions repeated thousands of times daily. The success
depends a lot on the sophistication of the algorithms, the low-latency infrastructure,
and the co-location near stock exchanges. There’s a constant operational risk.
You might be fascinated with technology, so it can be helpful to know that HFT exists.
However, getting involved in this form of trading also means upgrading infrastructure.
Even Python libraries might be too slow to outperform competitors.

291 11.4 Orders
11.4.2 Order modifiers
Think of the market as an asynchronous system where tasks are queued. You select the
execution logic by creating an order object and submitting it. The parameters you
pass to that object, such as asking for immediate execution or execution at a specific
price, might adjust the performance.
 In this section, we look at order types and order modalities, giving you more
insights into executing orders so they meet your investment goals. Let’s start with
order types.
ORDER TYPES
Orders can be categorized based on their execution triggers, as described in table 11.3.
We can either execute them at once or at a specific price.
Table 11.3 Different order types when buying or selling assets
Order type Description
Market order A market order is the “just do it now” approach. It tells a system to buy or sell immedi-
ately at the current market price. If we had to shape it into a method, we would use a 
signature such as executeTradeImmediately(ticker,  amount). We pass the 
ticker and the amount to the system, and the transaction will be executed next.
Limit order Sometimes, we prefer an order to be executed if a price reaches a certain level. This 
is the domain of the limit order. In a code analogy, we can see it as executeTrade-
When(price  <= targetPrice):  If the price reaches the target price threshold, 
execute the trade.
Stop order Stop orders, also known as stop-loss orders, help to manage risks. You can create stop 
orders to protect yourself against losses. They trigger a market order when a price falls 
below a given level. Translated to code, it would be a method such as triggerTrade-
When(price  <= stopPrice) .
Imagine you hold shares at $100 and are afraid that a catalyst may hit the market and 
your stock may plummet. If you make a stop-loss order at $90, your stocks will automat-
ically be sold when they fall below $90.
Stop-limit 
orderA stop-limit order triggers a limit order when a price is reached. As a combination of 
stop and limit orders, we can define this method as follows: triggerLimitTrade-
WhenPriceBetween(limitPrice,  stopPrice) .
This order carries a risk that the market may move too quickly, leaving your position 
unsold. Imagine, like in the stop order example, you hold $100. You can make a stop-
limit order with a limit price of $89 and a stop price of $90. If the falls from $91 directly 
to $88, the sell order wouldn’t be triggered in a stop-limit order. If then the price went up 
again to $89.50, the order would be triggered.
Trailing stop Like a self-adjusting algorithm, this order type follows the stock’s price movement by a 
set margin. If the stock price rises, the stop price adjusts; if the stock falls by a set 
amount, the order is triggered: adjustStopPriceDynamically(trailAmount) .
If the price rises, the stop price moves up. If it drops $5 from the peak, it sells.

292 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
ORDER MODALITIES
Order modalities are parameters for executing orders, as described in table 11.4.
They can be parameters for every order type introduced earlier.
11.4.3 Executing orders
Let’s use Python APIs to execute orders using Interactive Brokers and Alpaca. We
examined both brokers in chapter 6, so we won’t explain them again here.
INTERACTIVE  BROKERS
In chapter 6, we mentioned that we needed to start a local application called the
Trader Workstation to use a Python API for Interactive Brokers. The Python API con-
nects to this workstation and executes read operations through this application. We
can also buy and sell shares through this connection. The following snippet shows the
code to connect to the Interactive Broker’s Trader Workstation app:
from ib_insync import *
util.startLoop()
ib = IB()
ib.connect()
Let’s execute orders after connecting to the platform. In the following code, we must
pass the parameters about the stock we want to look at to create a contract object:
import pandas as pd
def get_data(market_data):
    print(f"Market Data: {market_data.ask}")
    print(f"askSize: {market_data.askSize}")
    print(f"marketPrice: {market_data.marketPrice()}")
    print(f"marketPrice: {market_data.time}")
contract_apple = Stock("AAPL", "SMART", "USD")
market_data = ib.reqMktData(contract_apple)
get_data(market_data)Table 11.4 Order modalities for order types
Order modality Description
Fill or kill (FOK) When you’ve bought shares in the past, you might have observed that not all 
orders are fulfilled at once. Sometimes, you have more than one transaction. The 
FOK order ensures that the entire order is fulfilled immediately or gets aborted.
Good ’til canceled 
(GTC)Orders are usually only valid during a trading day. An order submitted with the GTC 
modality stays active until it’s executed or canceled manually. GTC orders are 
especially valuable for stop-loss orders. Combining a stop-loss order with a GTC 
ensures that you never go below a certain point, protecting yourself from the 
effects of a market crash.
GTC doesn’t mean “forever.” Different brokers set different time limits until a GTC 
order expires. These expiration time frames are usually between 0 and 90 days after 
investors placed the orders. Be sure to explore the modalities of your brokers.

293 11.4 Orders
After that, we collect the market data for the shares. The market data also contains the
ask price we must pay to purchase the asset. Remember, there’s always a tiny spread
between ask (buying) and bid (selling) prices, as this is how brokers make money.
 Finally, it’s also possible to place market orders. Brokers execute market orders
using the current market price. Some investors believe that market orders are fine
when you need to be fast and expect the price to only go in one direction:
order = MarketOrder(action = "BUY", totalQuantity = 1)
trade = ib.placeOrder(contract_apple, order)
A limit order allows an investor to define a minimum cost to buy or sell. In the follow-
ing code, we execute a limit order with a price of $200. Suppose an investor believes
that a share price will fluctuate during the day. In that case, it’s often recommended
not to buy at the first possible opportunity but rather to buy at a price that is likely to
be good during the trading day:
order = LimitOrder(action = "BUY", totalQuantity = 1, lmtPrice = 200)
trade = ib.placeOrder(contract, order)
One detail of how Interactive Brokers tries to differentiate itself from many other bro-
kers is the number of exchanges this broker supports. As a user of Interactive Brokers,
you need to be aware that there are also paid subscriptions for premium services. For
some markets, you’ll get delayed data without these premium services.
ALPACA
In chapter 6, we introduced Alpaca as a broker. This broker is developer-friendly and
has good APIs. We set the client up using the following code to get an object repre-
senting your trading account:
from alpaca.trading.client import TradingClient
from alpaca.trading.requests import GetAssetsRequest
k = get_secret("broker.alpaca.key")
s = get_secret("broker.alpaca.secret")
trading_client = TradingClient(k, s, paper=True)
account = trading_client.get_account()
Before we start trading, let’s parse tradable assets on this platform. The following snip-
pets define search parameters to look for US equity on the NASDAQ exchange whose
status is active:
from alpaca.trading.enums import AssetClass, AssetExchange, AssetStatus
search_params = GetAssetsRequest(asset_class=AssetClass.US_EQUITY, 
   exchange=AssetExchange.NASDAQ, status=AssetStatus.ACTIVE)
assets = trading_client.get_all_assets(search_params)
print(f"{len(assets)} found")

294 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
Depending on the execution time, you might get different results. When writing this
book, this method returns 4,772 tradable stocks.
NOTE In this code, we use the parameter paper=True . This setting means that
t r a d e s  a r e  e x e c u t e d  i n  A l p a c a  o n l y  o n  p a p e r .  I f  y o u  w e r e  t o  r e m o v e  t h i s
parameter, you would trade for real.
Let’s find out if a specific stock is tradable by obtaining an asset from the client and
then calling the method tradable  (when writing this book, NuScale Power Corpora-
tion [SMR] was tradable):
trading_asset = trading_client.get_asset("SMR")
if trading_asset.tradable:
    print(f'We can trade {asset}.')
To be able to buy shares, let’s find out how much we have to pay per share by getting
the asking price. The ask_price  is a variable of an object that the client returns:
from alpaca.data import StockHistoricalDataClient
from alpaca.data.requests import StockLatestQuoteRequest
stock_client = StockHistoricalDataClient(k, s)
quote = StockLatestQuoteRequest(symbol_or_symbols="SMR")
latest_multisymbol_quotes = stock_client.get_stock_latest_quote(quote)
latest_ask_price = latest_multisymbol_quotes[symbol].ask_price
print(latest_ask_price)
Let’s look at how to execute a market order to buy or sell an asset at the market price.
In the following snippet, we execute it as a FOK as specified with the parameter
time_in_force :
from alpaca.trading.requests import OrderRequest
from alpaca.trading.enums import OrderSide, TimeInForce, OrderType
order_request = OrderRequest(
                   symbol="SMR",
                   qty = 2,
                   side = OrderSide.BUY,
                   type = OrderType.MARKET,
                   time_in_force = TimeInForce.FOK
                   )
new_order  = trading_client.submit_order(
               order_data=order_request
              )
We can also trigger limit orders using Alpaca, which allows an investor to set a mini-
mum price for buying or selling. In the following snippet, we add a time_in_force
parameter that validates this order until it’s executed or canceled by the user:

295 Summary
from alpaca.trading.requests import LimitOrderRequest
limit_order_data = LimitOrderRequest(
                    symbol="SMR",
                    limit_price=8,
                    notional=2,
                    side=OrderSide.BUY,
                    time_in_force=TimeInForce.GTC
                   )
limit_order = trading_client.submit_order(
                order_data=limit_order_data
Summary
The efficient market theory assumes that we can’t beat the market because the
price results from all the information available to investors.
Nonfinancial data can be an untapped resource for learning details about assets
that other investors don’t yet know. It can contain hidden information to beat
the market.
Data such as media, geolocation data, demographics, or trends might tell you
much about additional insights that can be added as factors to a model.
Nonfinancial data isn’t as openly available as financial data, which must be
reported for public companies. However, you can purchase access to nonfinan-
cial data on some marketplaces.
A catalyst in equity markets is something that propels the price of a stock dra-
matically up or down. Catalysts include mergers and acquisitions (M&A), bank-
ruptcy filings, earnings calls, disasters, and interest rate changes.
M&A means that two companies join forces. Such a big event often creates bigger
movements in share prices. Being able to predict successful M&As can be rewarding.
Bankruptcy is also a profit opportunity if existing shareholders panic and sell
their shares too fast. However, it’s a considerable risk to bet on a bankrupt com-
pany’s turnaround. If a stalking horse agreement (a buyer’s commitment to buy
the resources at a minimum price if an auction doesn’t yield a higher price) is
in place, risks are lower.
Every publicly traded company has quarterly earnings calls, during which the
executives report on the company’s performance. Missing or surpassing the
earnings estimates can cause substantial shifts in stock prices.
Disasters, such as wars and natural catastrophes, affect share prices. Some com-
panies make more profits when disasters happen. Buying shares of them at the
beginning of a calamity or selling them before a disaster ends can be a strategy
to make profits.
The Federal Reserve interest (or its equivalent in other countries) defines the
interest rate at which it lends money to borrowers. Capital-intensive companies—
those that need more external investments to be successful—are more affected
by interest rate changes.

296 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
Investing in low-priced capital-intensive companies can be beneficial before the
Fed reduces the rate. However, some capital-intensive companies face bank-
ruptcy risks if the interest rates are high.
You can define algorithmic trading strategies, which you define when you buy
and when you sell.
Backtesting is a way to test buy and sell the strategies you created by validating
them using historical data.
Even if your backtesting strategy is successful, past results don’t guarantee future
results.
A simple moving average (SMA) crossover strategy extracts buy and sell signals
based on two SMAs with different time windows. SMA crossover strategies don’t
always return better results than “buy low and sell high” strategies.
We can add more complex rules to evaluate buy-and-sell decisions in algo-
rithms. Factors are the criteria we might consider for decision-making.
While we can use Python to program trading algorithms and backtest them, some
platforms offer this as a service so that customers don’t need coding experience.
A trader buys assets through a broker, who will purchase them from an exchange.
Brokers hold assets in the name of a holder.
A trader can buy crypto assets directly from an exchange.
Exchanges and brokers charge commissions per order.
A market order is to be transacted immediately at the current price.
A limit order is an order executed at a specific price. The order is canceled if
the price isn’t reached during a trading day.
A stop order triggers an order when the share price exceeds a defined stop price.
A stop limit triggers an order executed when the share price is between a mini-
mum (limit price) and a maximum (stop price).
A trailing stop order adjusts the stop price. It moves with the market price and
is triggered by sharp changes.
Fill or kill (FOK) is a parameter that determines whether an entire order is exe-
cuted. The broker won’t execute the order in parts.
Good ’til canceled (GTC) is a parameter for an order that doesn’t expire. The
person who created it can either execute or cancel it. Some brokers will still
mark GTC orders as expired if they aren’t executed over an extended period.
If you set a stop order with a GTC, you can prevent yourself from significant
losses when the market collapses.

297Private equity:
Investing in start-ups
Many programmers contemplate starting a start-up at some point. Even if you
haven’t considered creating one, you’ve likely had friends who have. Ambitious
development teams can produce impressive products with minimal up-front costs,
especially when working without salaries, but eventually, finances become a critical
topic of discussion.
 Working purely for equity, however, isn’t always enough to create a product.
Some team members require immediate cash flow to meet living expenses, so sala-
ries or invoicing for their contributions is necessary. While cloud providers may
offer attractive starter packages, they typically don’t provide unlimited free resources.
Additionally, acquiring and servicing clients incurs extra costs.This chapter covers
Investing in start-ups
Seeing a start-up’s evolution from pre-seed 
to Series C
Comparing venture funds, angel syndicates, 
and sovereign wealth funds
Addressing valuation, dilution, and scoring

298 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
 In this chapter, we turn the tables for those of you considering launching a start-
up. Rather than examining start-ups from a programmer’s perspective—focused on
attracting investors and meeting their expectations—we’ll adopt the investor’s view-
point, assessing start-ups from a top-down, scenario-based approach. By investing
money in a start-up, an investor receives a portion of the company in return, com-
monly referred to as equity. As this ownership isn’t traded on a public market like a
stock exchange, ownership in a start-up is referred to as private equity. Let’s delve into
how investors evaluate opportunities in private equity that comes from investing
money in a start-up.
12.1 From idea to initial public offering
Investors have developed a model that illustrates the growth of start-ups, beginning
with pre-seed and seed funding and progressing through various stages of develop-
ment until an initial public offering (IPO). Each stage has specific challenges based
on the start-up’s evolution. Let’s explore these phases. The goal of the subsequent sec-
tions is to view them from an investor’s perspective and highlight the differences from
a founder’s perspective.
12.1.1 The first minimum viable product (pre-seed)
Imagine your friend Fred finally decides to take the plunge. He’s been discussing his
start-up idea for months, and now he’s ready to create a minimum viable product
(MVP)  to validate it. Fred is committed to programming the backend and business
logic, while his cofounder, Lin, a seasoned corporate professional like him, focuses
on the frontend.
 Neither expects a salary, but they have genuine expenses—such as cloud services,
marketing, and sales—that they don’t want to shoulder alone. They reached out to
family and potential investors. The investors declined, citing high risk, but family
members contributed enough to assist with some of the costs.
 Now, you meet them and pose the critical questions: How much cash do you need
to advance your MVP? And more importantly, what’s in it for me if I provide you with
at least part of the necessary funds?
 If you recognize the potential in Fred and Lin’s start-up ideas, you may have a self-
serving reason to invest. In 1981, a venture capitalist invested $1 million in a company
for a 10% stake in the equity. This company went public in March 1986. Today, that
investment would be worth billions of dollars. The company was Microsoft.
 Of course, nobody can predict that Fred and Lin will step into the shoes of Bill
Gates and Paul Allen, but let’s consider a scenario. What if you invested $10,000 for a
10% equity stake, and later someone else invested millions for an additional 10%? Even
if Fred and Lin were “just” acquired in five years, this check could transform into life-
changing wealth. This is the fundamental power of early-stage investing—recognizing
potential before the world does. But before you write that check, let’s discuss how to
evaluate such opportunities.

299 12.1 From idea to initial public offering
At the pre-seed stage, personal relationships frequently influence investment deci-
sions. Founders typically approach friends and family first, not only for financial sup-
port but also for their endorsement of the vision.
 Your perception of the founders plays a crucial role in shaping your understanding
of them. Maybe you see Fred as a dreamer who has frequently misjudged situations.
You know he has a family and can’t just quit his job. How long can he sustain working
nights before reality forces him to give up? Or maybe Fred is that rare genius who can
make anything happen—the person you’d regret not backing.
 Additionally, the perception of the start-up’s business model can differ if you’re an
investor rather than a founder. As a founder, you’re naturally more likely to be biased.
You may have seen a market from the perspective of someone who has the desire to
create something. Regardless, if you want to get rich or change the world, exploring
your idea is different from exploring someone else’s. You can be hooked on a “why.”
Perhaps as a founder, you believe in your start-up because you see your development
skills as superior to others, or you believe in a yearlong observation that gradually
completes a puzzle into a full picture of what the world needs. As an investor, you have
a different perspective. Your focus is likely on the business model. The first question
isn’t how to create a product—it’s how likely your investment will gain value. YourDon’t mistake pre-seed start-ups for lottery tickets
For pre-seed start-ups, it’s tempting to take the easy route when asked for invest-
ment. Consider this typical response:
Instead of investing money, I’d rather contribute my time and advice. No worries,
I don’t expect a payment, but if I land a client and help with the basics, maybe
you can throw some equity my way?
Now, let’s reframe this. Imagine you buy an old house that needs serious renova-
tions. A friend offers to help but wants 10% ownership in return. Or, another analogy,
you have a baby, and another friend offers occasional babysitting, expecting to be
named a godparent.
When approached for pre-seed investments, offering advice or minimal efforts for
equity is like trying to buy a lottery ticket. The chances of betting on a unicorn are as
low as winning the jackpot, but it still feels tempting to try one’s luck occasionally.
The problem is that it just doesn’t work this way.
Start-ups demand full commitment. To be part of the journey, you need skin in the
game —either capital or sustained, mission-critical effort. The latter is tricky to mea-
sure: one friend might work for months and contribute nothing valuable, while another
might deliver a game-changing feature in a day.
Money, however, is clear-cut. The size of their checks easily compares to investors’
contributions. Everyone understands the risk—if the start-up fails, the investor loses
money. That risk justifies compensation. But expecting a meaningful stake simply for
offering occasional advice? That’s wishful thinking.

300 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
observation is narrower on questions such as network effects, scalability, and revenue
growth opportunities, so you don’t need to worry as much about the details to get
there. If you were a founder before and then became an investor, you’ll likely be sur-
prised at how your focus changes.
 Pre-seed investment is the ultimate high-risk, high-reward game. In many cases, it’s
just enough cash to get the founders started. Sure, if your start-up founder turns out
to be the next Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, or Jeff Bezos, your small check could be life-
changing. But statistically, the odds aren’t in your favor.
 Most of the time, you’ll never see that money again. So, the real question is this:
Are you betting on a vision or just funding a friend’s expensive hobby?
The reality of first start-ups and incubators 
If you’re young and working on your first start-up, the odds are stacked against you.
Most first-time founders fail. Many investors consider a founder’s track record of fail-
ures a badge of experience. Failure isn’t just common—it’s expected.
This is where incubators come in. An incubator program is designed to help founders
turn an idea into a viable business. They provide office space, mentorship, and
resources to help young, ambitious teams “incubate” their start-ups.
A typical incubator welcomes all kinds of founders—some with promising ideas and
others who will soon realize their idea isn’t viable or that start-up life isn’t for them.
Over a few intensive weeks or months, start-ups experience highs and lows, set-
backs, and breakthroughs. However, the harsh reality is that most incubated start-
ups will still fail.
Incubators aren’t free to run. They require funding, which can come from multiple
sources:
Government grants and public funding —Governments often provide financing
for incubators to stimulate innovation.
Corporate sponsorships —Large companies sponsor incubators to stay close to
innovation.
Universities and research institutions —Many incubators are affiliated with uni-
versities, helping students commercialize their research.
Venture capitalists and angel investors —Some incubators are backed by inves-
tors looking for early-stage deal flow.
Membership and service fees —Some incubators charge start-ups for participation.
Equity stakes —Many incubators take a small equity percentage in exchange
for resources.
For founders, an incubator can be an invaluable learning experience. But for inves-
tors? Backing incubator-stage start-ups is a high-risk game—one that requires
patience, deep pockets, or a willingness to lose money in search of the next big suc-
cess story.

301 12.1 From idea to initial public offering
12.1.2 Validating the business model (seed)
Imagine receiving an invitation to join the panel to judge the final presentations of an
incubation program. You find yourself among experienced investors, many of whom
have business backgrounds rather than technical ones. If you had looked at their
LinkedIn profiles, you would have noticed a common theme—advisory roles, connec-
tions with influential leaders, and proud mentions of their experiences with Fortune
100 companies. They speak a different language from the programmers you’re used
to. They throw around terms such as venture growth , highlighting their speaking
engagements and subtly (or not) displaying their networks.
 The event begins. One by one, start-ups pitch their ideas, following a format that
has been drilled into them by their mentors. They know they must discuss TAM, SAM,
and SOM (see the NOTE box), as well as other metrics that investors expect to hear.
Some pitches are promising, some are uninspiring, and some are downright painful
to watch.
NOTE TAM, SAM, and SOM aren’t long-lost relatives of Donald Duck. The
total addressable market (TAM) represents the global potential market for a
product, whereas the serviceable available market (SAM) refers to the audi-
ence the product could reach. A serviceable obtainable market (SOM) is the
portion of the addressable market that a business is likely to own. One chal-
lenge for investors is often the speculative nature of the numbers that start-up
founders provide, which typically lack supporting evidence.
Now, the tables have turned. Founders are trying to impress you, and suddenly, you see
things in a different light. Before you asked angels for investment, you had all the
questions other angels might have had about your start-up.
The pitch
The first presenter focuses solely on himself. His team consists of a group of people
executing his vision. He believes he has built something amazing and is passionate
about his product. But what if you gave him a substantial amount of money? Would
his arrogance drive the team away? If no one challenges him, would he crash and
burn his one-person show?
Another team takes the stage, but its pitch is filled with uncertainty. Their voices rise
at the end of every sentence as if they constantly question themselves. There’s ner-
vous laughter, hesitation, and zero confidence. Imagine Rocky Balboa’s victory
pose—then picture the exact opposite. That’s them. Deep down, they don’t believe
they deserve investment, and you can feel it.
Another founder tries to tell an elaborate story but loses the audience within the first
minute. Even the incubator instructors look confused. You watch, waiting for clarity,
but it never comes. At the end of the pitch, you still have no idea what the product
does or who the customers are. Trying too hard to be impressive often backfires.

302 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
At the pre-seed stage, investments are often made by personal friends, family, and
close connections who believe in a founder’s vision. At the seed stage, the interactions
are almost exclusively business-related. Investors want traction, real customers, and a
scalable business model. Seed-stage start-ups need the following:
First customers to validate demand
First hires to expand capacity
Proof that an MVP can be replicated at scale
At this point, investors aren’t just betting on an idea—they’re assessing whether
emerging businesses can grow into something big.(continued)
Then comes a team that nails its pitch. Their business model makes sense, the mar-
ket is there, and their growth strategy is solid. This could work. If it goes viral, they
could acquire thousands of customers overnight. But then they demo the product,
and as an engineer, you can tell right away that they still have a long way to go to
have even an MVP. The vision is there, but can they execute?
This is the reality of incubator-stage start-ups. Many won’t make it past this stage.
Some have potential but still lack key elements. A few might have paying custom-
ers—real validation—but they still need to prove they can scale their operations
effectively.
From an investor’s point of view, you need to make up your mind fast. You invest not
just in a product but also in people. And even if you shortlist two or three out of an
incubator’s cohort, you still need to decide if you want to risk the money you would
give them. 
Accelerator 
You’re not in a seed phase unless you’ve built an MVP and proven serious about turn-
ing it into a reality. One of the most significant differences between pre-seed and
seed is formal incorporation. You may still operate informally at the pre-seed stage
with no formal legal entity in place. However, once you reach the seed stage—espe-
cially if you want to invoice clients—you need to establish a company. Incorporation
is no longer optional, whether it’s an LLC, C-Corp, or another structure.
For many founders, the seed phase is a turning point. Should you quit your day job?
If you haven’t already, now is the time to decide whether to commit to a full-time role.
The seed stage is, therefore, not just about getting investment—it’s about speed.
You don’t want to waste months dragging out an acceleration program or endless
fundraising while working a day job. You need to move fast to do the following:
Start acquiring real customers
Prove that your early-stage product gets attention in the market
Scale operations to a point where more significant investors take you seriously

303 12.1 From idea to initial public offering
12.1.3 Scaling a start-up: The shift to institutional investment
As a start-up grows, the risk of failure decreases, but at the same time, the funding
requirements increase. While individual investors can still back pre-seed and seed
rounds, later-stage start-ups require institutional investors to fuel their growth.
 Once past the early stages, founders want to focus on their business, but raising
money is an art. It requires access to a network of high-net-worth individuals, venture
capital (VC) firms, and investment institutions specializing in scaling start-ups.
 You might attract investors without going through an investment firm if you’re
already a known celebrity or industry leader. But for most start-ups, funding isn’t just
about the money—it’s about the network, expertise, and structured investment pro-
cess that firms provide. Investment firms aren’t just check-writers; they act as agents
for the start-up, helping with the following:
Legal and accounting aspects —Ensuring investments are appropriately structured
and booked
Business strategy —Connecting start-ups with the right talent, advisors, and partners
Future fundraising —Laying the groundwork for later-stage funding rounds
Start-ups follow distinct funding stages, each with a different focus. Let’s look at
them next.
SERIES A: S CALING  THE BUSINESS  MODEL
The company has not only hired employees but also acquired its first customers,
learning how to manage them and continuously provide value. The focus is on refin-
ing the business model and scaling the product.
 For founders, this is a crucial phase. They must work a lot, and there’s still a con-
siderable risk of failure; most likely, the big VC firms aren’t yet interested in you. Most
Series A companies aren’t profitable yet. Investors prioritize growth over profits at this
stage. Companies with a higher burn rate—spending their investments more quickly—
are especially pressured to advance to the next stage rapidly.
SERIES B: S CALING  OPERATIONS  AND MARKET  EXPANSION
The start-up has a solid foundation and proven business model. The leaders shift their
focus to expanding into new markets and optimizing monetization. The company’s
style is evolving. From founders who do everything, the start-up establishes hierarchies
and responsibilities.
 However, working in a Series B start-up is still demanding. You have more precise
goals and more apparent competitive strategies because you’ve discovered what worksWhen you have paying customers and a plan to scale further, you’re no longer just
“working on a start-up idea”—you’re running a business. Investors now look at your
traction, execution speed, and ability to scale. The question isn’t “Is this a great
idea?” but “Is this a company that can grow fast and generate returns?”

304 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
in the market and what doesn’t. You also know your real competitors on the market,
and you need to incentivize your team to work hard to stay ahead.
 Investors still prioritize growth, but managing burn rate has become increasingly
critical. Investors still accept that the company isn’t yet profitable, but they expect to
see a clear path to profitability.
SERIES C: M ARKET  DOMINATION  AND ACQUISITIONS
When you reach Series C, you should have a stable niche in the market and be
regarded as a key player there. In some exceptional cases, especially when your
start-up is in a blue ocean market, being a market leader is the key to becoming a
unicorn.
 The company aims to expand internationally, enhance its technology, and acquire
other start-ups. However, the primary goal is still a successful exit. In that case, an exit
means that an industry giant acquires the start-up or the start-up goes public through
an IPO, which means it becomes a publicly traded company and is listed on the stock
market. Investors will benefit significantly from this, as their investment has been suc-
cessful, and they can reap the rewards.
12.1.4 Exits: The final transition
For many developers, discussing start-ups with venture capitalists or serial entrepre-
neurs can be a valuable and eye-opening experience. Unlike traditional businesses
that grow organically, start-ups backed by investors are built with an exit in mind
from day one. The term exit is often thrown around, but it can mean different
things:
A high-profile acquisition by a larger company
An IPO that lists the start-up’s shares on a public exchange
A smaller-scale acquisition that occurs when another company acquires a start-up
A shutdown, which technically is still an exit
A successful exit is selling the company at a profit or transferring ownership to
become a publicly traded company. Commonly, every founder celebrates every form
of exit, but the successful ones do so more extensively. An exit means that you’ve
started a business and ended it. A shutdown without an acquisition or a fire sale of the
start-up is, strictly speaking, an unsuccessful exit, and investors will lose money. How-
ever, from a different perspective, taking the risk and becoming a founder is a strong
commitment, and many factors—including pure luck—influence how a company will
ultimately exit. Therefore, unsuccessful exits—some founders may use the term suc-
cessfully failed —can be a badge of honor for founders. Many investors will value found-
ers who have had only unsuccessful exits more than first-time founders who haven’t
had any exits. Table 12.1 summarizes the four types of exits, along with a reference
scenario, to help us understand what was happening.
 

305 12.1 From idea to initial public offering
But why is an exit so important? Investing in private equity means locking up money
for years. Unlike stocks, which can be sold at any time, VC investments are typically
illiquid. Investors take extreme risks, and many start-ups fail. Therefore, when a start-
up exits successfully, the returns must be substantial to compensate for the failures
and inflation. This explains the pressure for speed. For founders, it’s essential to
understand why hardly any venture capitalist wants to invest in a company that is grow-
ing slowly and is already profitable. After all, the dividends are small, and a return on
investment over many years isn’t what they have signed up for. A company with slow
growth expectations doesn’t attract the attention of buyers.
 If a start-up has no viable business model—something that is often unknown in
advance—investors want to fail it quickly so they can refocus their attention on those
start-ups with a viable business model. Investors who have enjoyed collaborating with
the founding team that reached a later stage might even tell the founders to bring a
new horse instead of riding a dead one. A fail-fast culture demands that time be mini-
mized to achieve results and, in some cases, that we be able to try again soon.
 From an investor’s point of view, if you want to get into VC, you need to shift your
mindset. You need to ask different questions, such as these:
Who has acquired similar start-ups before?
Who would buy this start-up? (Can this company become attractive to Google,
Amazon, Microsoft, Meta, or another giant?)
Is the start-up building something that fills a real gap that someone will want
once it has scaled?
Is the team valuable?
The last item highlights another practice, known as acqui-hire . Some investors might
understand that your start-up won’t be the one that builds a product to become aTable 12.1 Types of exits (successful and unsuccessful)
Exit Reference scenario Returns
IPO Company A is a Series C company. After long talks and planning with investment 
bankers, they finally announce their IPO. After the IPO, an investor can trade his 
ownership on the stock market. High
Acquisition Company B is sold to an industry giant for billions. Direct investors are paid out 
and make a huge profit. Limited partners (LPs) get their profits minus carry fee 
and their initial investment paid out.High
Fire sale Company C is a company in distress but can sell itself to another company. 
Unlike a successful acquisition, in a fire sale, the buyer’s investment is largely 
to pay off debts. The investors won’t receive their full investment back.Partial
Shutdown Company D is a company in distress but shut down. Unlike in the fire sale, no 
company wants to acquire the company. Maybe some equipment, such as com-
puters and office equipment, can be liquidated, but investors will likely not 
receive any money.None

306 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
market leader. However, at the same time, they recognize an immense shortage of
qualified engineers, and a large company may pay millions to secure top engineers on
its payroll.
NOTE Often, it doesn’t require building a highly profitable start-up, but
rather solutions that can become highly profitable in the right hands. For
some companies, a start-up with a solid product and capable engineers in a
future market, such as quantum computing, can be highly valuable even if it
generates no profits.
12.2 Investment vehicles
First, let’s ask the maybe most fundamental question when deciding whether to invest
in start-ups: If you have money, why bet on such a risky venture as start-ups? Blue-chip
stocks and diversified exchange-traded funds (ETFs) provide steady growth, divi-
dends, and low risk. And as we’ve seen in this book, you can hardly go wrong with an
index fund. After all, there’s a high chance that you’ll lose your entire investment in a
start-up if it fails (and statistics indicate that 90% of them do).
A deeper dive into private equity
Private equity refers to investments in privately held companies. While start-ups are
the primary focus of private equity investments, investors may also invest in estab-
lished, private businesses that aren’t start-ups. The goal of private equity invest-
ments is to acquire a significant stake in target companies, transform them, and
benefit from the resulting value increase. The company’s ownership is defined in the
cap table, which outlines the owners and their shares. 
Suppose a company is successful and consequently more highly valued than before.
The value of private equity shares usually grows far more in percentage than those
invested in large public companies. One reason can relate to the efficient market the-
ory. While the markets have extensive information about public companies, new pri-
vate companies are largely unknown to investors, and this means their information
can’t yet be priced.
High rewards come with high risks. If a start-up fails, the money invested is likely
gone. Valuation and your eventual return are vague for a long time. Critics see private
equity as a form of high and illiquid investment, meaning, unlike stocks in a public
company, you can’t sell your stocks at any time for a relatively predictable price. So,
why do it if you can achieve relatively safe gains by keeping your money in a 10-year
index fund?
While institutional investors have, of course, learned to manage risks, for private
investors, the primary motivation is often finding the one outlier in a batch of start-
ups that are otherwise doomed to fail within the next two to three years. Everything
is rooted in the same confidence in buying public stock—you believe you see some-
thing others don’t see.

307 12.2 Investment vehicles
Microsoft went public on March 13, 1986, for $21 per share. Through a stock split,
that single share would now be equivalent to 288 shares. As of January 31, 2024, one
share purchased at the IPO would be worth nearly $120,000. But if you had invested
in Microsoft before it went public, you would get one share for even less than $21, and
you can calculate many scenarios of how much money you could have made by being
one of the first investors in such a company.
 Someone needs to bring the next Microsoft to the stock exchange. If we imagine
that all venture capitalists disappeared overnight, there would be no new businesses in
the market to challenge the status quo. The countrywide innovation cycle would slow
down because talented individuals with great ideas would no longer receive funding.
A short window of opportunity often exists to launch a new concept in the market. If
you’re too slow, the opportunity is lost. There’s no way innovation at scale can exist
without VC.
Overall, we understand that if we find a future unicorn—a start-up valued at over a bil-
lion dollars—there is likely no other investment category in the world that offers
returns comparable to those of an investment in a unicorn. For some angels, search-
ing for potentially strong early-stage start-ups may still feel like playing the lottery, but
the industry has evolved. Angels often form syndicates to evaluate promising start-ups
together, thereby reducing their overall risk of failure. Increasingly, public funds are
available for early-stage start-ups as countries recognize that this investment can yield
significant returns. Even if founders can’t use the pre-seed or seed funding received
from a sovereign fund or public investment program, young engineers who strive for
success learn valuable lessons along the way, enhancing their worth in the job market.Innovation and corporate business
Google acquired YouTube in 2005, and Meta acquired WhatsApp in 2014. A fair
question is why don’t these cash-rich companies build these solutions themselves?
Given their talent and funding, wouldn’t developing a new messenger or video-sharing
platform in-house be easier?
The reality is that many R&D teams of companies focus on refining existing products
rather than developing new ones that might disrupt their market. But there’s also a
practical reason: if only 1 in 100 start-ups manages to be exceptional, an industry
giant with superior resources might improve those odds—but even if 5 out of 100
start-ups build stunning products, the company still wastes significant resources.
Cash may not even be the constraint, but engineering talent is.
Moreover, corporate engineers often prioritize work-life balance. A start-up demands
relentless dedication—something an internal team may struggle to match. Frequently,
the founder’s commitment to creating something extraordinary can’t be matched by
any salary. So, while billion-dollar acquisitions might seem extravagant, they often
make financial sense when you run the numbers.

308 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
They may outperform their peers when entering a corporate job with their skills. Let’s
examine the investment vehicles in detail.
12.2.1 Venture capital
Venture capitalists typically focus on start-ups in later stages—Series A, B, and beyond—
where risks are lower and returns are still high. However, there are exceptions, such as
incubators affiliated with elite universities, where the chances of discovering the next
unicorn are significantly higher.
 When discussing top-tier venture capitalists, specific names dominate the market,
including Sequoia, Andreessen Horowitz (aka AH Capital Management, LLC, or
a16z), Accel, Benchmark, Tiger Global, SoftBank, and many more. Be aware that
smaller, emerging venture funds are also available.
 Let’s say you have a five- or six-digit investment amount in your account and want
to get in on the next WhatsApp-style deal. Why not simply contact one of these ven-
ture capitalists and secure a position? Bad news: it doesn’t work that way.
 VCs primarily work with institutional investors, including pension funds, sovereign
wealth funds, university endowments, and ultra-high-net-worth individuals (e.g., bil-
lionaires, rather than retail investors). If you’re a billionaire, exceptions might be
made. Otherwise, they won’t take your call.
 The good news is that fund managers run VC funds for large private investors. So,
you might not call Sequoia directly and tell them you have some bucks to spare for
one specific company, but you can look for pooled investments and find someone who
collects investments from wealthy private investors. The minimum investment size is
typically $100,000 or more, and it can sometimes exceed millions. There’s an annual
management fee, most are about 2%. There’s a carry fee of 20%, which is a fee that is
only paid on profits. If your investment generates $100,000 in profits, $20,000 is allo-
cated to the venture capitalist. You receive the remaining $80,000, minus the initial
investment and management fees. Figure 12.1 illustrates this flow of money in a sim-
plified fashion. Remember that every fund will have more limited partners (LPs); in
most cases, a fund invests in multiple start-ups. You should also be aware that more
than one fund can invest in the same start-up.
 Venture funds invest in multiple start-ups in parallel. Some of these companies will
be in Series C rounds. Every fund manager will ensure that the founders make a sub-
stantial commitment to an exit. After all, fund managers will be pressured by inves-
tors, who want to see results for their 2% annual management fees. In most cases,
investors will encounter some exits along the way, as the fund typically contains multi-
ple start-ups.
 
 

309 12.2 Investment vehicles
12.2.2 Angel networks
Investing in VC funds requires a substantial amount of capital. But what do you do if
you can’t afford the minimum ticket size? Does this imply that your chances of invest-
ing in a unicorn are slim unless you engage with them during the pre-seed and seed
funding stages before institutional investors are on board?
 While later-stage start-ups require significantly higher investments, it’s still possible
to invest in them even with a smaller wallet. Angel investors can form a syndicate. In a
syndicate, a seasoned lead investor identifies a start-up opportunity. The syndicate
negotiates the terms and determines the amount of capital to raise from LPs.
 Angel investors don’t have the same reach as established venture capitalists, who
often have access to start-up incubators located near elite universities. They can rarely
pool investors into a fund. However, angel investors often have a strong network and
frequently collaborate with serial investors who cofound start-ups.
NOTE One typical network of angels is a diaspora from a particular country.
For example, Armenia has a vast diaspora, especially in California. Many Arme-
nians living in the United States with accumulated capital are attracted to invest
in start-ups where the founders are in Armenia. This way, they can combine two
things: making money and helping the country they originated from.
So, let’s say an angel has negotiated a deal with a start-up in which he wants to invest.
The angel might be willing to invest $10,000, $50,000, or $100,000. However, a start-
up needs more than that. The angel negotiates a deal with the start-up. The parame-
ters of this deal include the desired check size, the timing of when the money is
needed, and the amount of equity the investing entity would receive for that money.Fund
Manager2% AnnualFee
IPO Event
TriggeredStart-UpInvestment
Limited Partner20% Carry Fee
80% Exit Return+
Remaining
Investment (If Left)Total Exit ReturnPayment
in Tranches
Figure 12.1 In the simplified money flow, 80% of the profits and your investment, minus 
the annual fees, will be returned to you.

310 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
 The angel negotiating the deal connects with other angels through a network to
become a lead investor in a jointly established Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) . An SPV is a
legal entity, typically an LLC, created for a specific investment purpose. In VC, SPVs
pool multiple investors into a single entity to invest in a start-up. Instead of each LP
appearing on the start-up’s cap table, the SPV is the only investor listed, simplifying legal
and administrative processes. Therefore, the lead investor’s role is to act as an agent (see
figure 12.2). He provides capital to the start-up and must manage all the formalities
associated with it.
Investors who join the SPV are referred to as LPs within that SPV. Being an LP in the
SPV means that, as an individual, you don’t own equity in the start-up, but you do have
a stake in the SPV. The SPV will be listed in the start-up cap table.
 You can search for companies on platforms such as AngelList as an individual
investor. You can also reach out to other angels on platforms such as LinkedIn. Angel
investors often create a one-pager summarizing the investment opportunity. In this
one-pager, you’ll find a summary of the company and its value proposition. You’ll
learn about their story, what made them successful, who the leaders are, and what they
want to achieve. The one-pager will outline economic moats and active users, as well
as share insights about the management team.
 Sometimes, if you approach angels, this one-pager looks more like a sales pitch.
The angel list will share details about earlier investment rounds, as they will want to
demonstrate that you’re not the first to believe in the start-up. The goal is typically an
acquisition or an IPO, and the angel syndicate will share success stories of how an
industry giant acquired a similar start-up with a comparable product in the past. This
suggests that a successful exit can result in billions.
 Like a VC, a syndicate looks for a minimum check size. If you exceed this size, you
typically increase it in 10k steps. Each round has a closing, meaning the opportunity is
gone if you decide too late.
 A lead investor, who bears most of the work and expenses to set up the deal, needs
to earn a return on their investment. In a VC, you have an annual management fee of
Lead InvestorSVP
Cap Table
Limited PartnerLimited Partner
Figure 12.2 A lead investor’s job is to represent all investors when forming an SVP that will 
be registered on a start-up’s cap table.

311 12.2 Investment vehicles
2%. However, with an investment in a single start-up, a yearly charge can become a
challenge. Imagine that this start-up needs many years to go public, paying 2% inter-
est nibbles away at much of your investment yearly. For this reason, syndicates often
request a one-time payment. This can be around a $7,000 one-time pro rata charge.
These charges cover all the expenses of a lead investor, as they also need to incur
costs for contracts, travel expenses, and other related expenses to finalize the deal.
Rarely is everything done with a quick online call; creating an agreement takes time
and experience.
 A lead investor who creates a syndicate wants to benefit from the start-up’s success.
As with venture capitalists, a lead investor often requests a carry fee of 20%. The same
rules apply as with VCs in that a carry fee is a charge on profits—no profit, no charge.
12.2.3 Sovereign wealth funds
Some countries’ leaders establish Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs), state-owned invest-
ment funds that manage national wealth. Typically, these funds are sourced from gov-
ernment surpluses, revenues from commodities (e.g., oil, gas, and minerals), or
foreign exchange reserves.
 These funds can be valuable resources for start-ups. A country lacking natural
resources requires investments to establish a start-up ecosystem that can compete
internationally. Alternatively, consider petrostates that derive their wealth from oil
and gas. These nations often seek to diversify their income sources, as the profits from
oil and gas are inevitably finite.
 Like VCs, it’s rare for individual investors to contribute to an SWF. However, many
SWFs focus on developing a start-up ecosystem. You can explore start-ups createdFounders
There is a thought experiment commonly attributed to Warren Buffett, which he pre-
sented to his students. Imagine you could choose a classmate and receive 50% of
that person’s future earnings for the rest of your life. Warren Buffett also flipped the
questions and asked students to short (bet against) a different classmate, meaning
they would have to pay 50% of that person’s future earnings. Who would they pick,
and why?
This thought experiment can be perfectly attributed to investing in start-ups. Most of
what start-ups eventually achieve depends on their founders. If you’re required to put
skin in the game, you must also ponder what makes someone successful. It might
not be intelligence, but traits such as work ethic, integrity, leadership, and resilience.
Some go even further. They say that founders aren’t just something to invest in when
evaluating a start-up, but the key thing. Ultimately, these founders present a busi-
ness model that will make the venture valuable. Perhaps whenever an investor met
Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, Jeff Bezos, and other successful founders, it was hard to say
if their ideas would truly bear fruit, as, at that time, nobody knew if personal comput-
ers, operating systems, or e-commerce platforms would be successful on the market.

312 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
through an SWF and engage where it makes sense. From an investor’s point of view,
you can explore which ecosystems sovereign funds invest in and if you can contribute
as well.
12.3 Assessing start-ups
Some investment decisions follow gut feelings. A charismatic and energized founder
who is determined to do something great can be a decisive factor for an investment
decision. After all, a saying goes that you invest as much in people as in the product.
And as the start-ups have no history, and founders can’t guarantee that their ideas will
be successful, how else can we decide but based on instinct?
 However, there are various ways to use programming to make educated decisions.
We look at some of them in this section.
12.3.1 Valuation
Valuing start-ups is different from valuing established companies. Traditional valua-
tion methods, such as price-to-earnings (P/E) ratios or Enterprise Value (EV), rely on
stable cash flows and profits. However, many start-ups aren’t yet profitable and may
have negative cash flow. Instead, investors rely on methods such as:
Comparable company analysis (CCA) —Comparing similar start-ups’ valuations
Precedent transactions —Looking at past acquisitions of similar companies
VC method —Estimating exit value based on expected returns
Discounted cash flow (DCF) —Projecting future cash flows based on present value
None of these methods can be used out of the box. We can’t apply the CCA method
unless we have data on enough start-ups. Using expected returns as a basis is a risky
approach. Almost every founder claims impressive figures, and without a critical
review, start-ups might be overvalued. Due diligence can be expensive and compli-
cated, as start-ups often lack the sophisticated accounting standards and accounting
history of established companies.
 While the DCF appears to be the most reliable method, we must still be aware that
revenue growth is uncertain, and we continue to face high burn rates and variable
expenses. In addition, in the early stages, the business models are often unproven. If
it’s still unclear how a company generates its revenue, how can we accurately forecast
its future cash flow?
NOTE Some start-ups try to do something utterly different, unlike anything
that exists on the market. Consider geoengineering solutions to reverse cli-
mate change, which involve partly experimental approaches. While such cases
require somewhat speculative models, investors still can define business mod-
els and estimate potential revenues. They add a markup for the risks of the
idea not working.
Despite these challenges, DCF can provide a structured approach to estimating a start-
up’s intrinsic value. Start-ups typically face high early-stage risk, so discount rates often

313 12.3 Assessing start-ups
range from 20% to 50%, which is significantly higher than those used for established
businesses.
 Let’s build a DCF model in Python, assuming a start-up expects to grow its revenue
and eventually reach positive cash flow. We need to set up some assumptions:
Revenue grows at 30% annually.
Expenses reduce over time as the start-up scales (10%).
Terminal value accounts for the long-term value after Year 5.
The discount rate is 40%, which means you reduce this percentage from the
final value to cover the risks.
The cash flow is calculated yearly as revenue minus expenses. Let’s look at listing 12.1
for the DCF. We first define the assumptions. Then, we use these inputs to project
future earnings and return the results.
import numpy as np
years = 5                     
initial_revenue = 500_000     
growth_rate = 0.3             
initial_expense = 700_000     
expense_reduction = 0.1       
discount_rate = 0.4           
cash_flows = []                                          
for t in range(1, years + 1):
    revenue = initial_revenue * (1 + growth_rate) ** t   
    expense = initial_expense * 
               (1 - expense_reduction) ** t              
    cash_flow = revenue - expense                        
    cash_flows.append(cash_flow)                         
terminal_growth_rate = 0.05                     
terminal_value = cash_flows[-1] * 
                 (1 + terminal_growth_rate) / 
                 (discount_rate – 
                  terminal_growth_rate)         
discounted_cash_flows = [
cf / (1 + discount_rate) ** (t+1) 
for t, cf in enumerate(cash_flows)]               
discounted_terminal_value = terminal_value / (
1 + discount_rate
) ** years                                        
startup_valuation = sum(
discounted_cash_flows
) + discounted_terminal_value                     
print(f"Estimated Startup Valuation: ${startup_valuation:,.2f}")Listing 12.1 DCF using Python
Sets the assumption, such as Forecast period, 
Initial revenue ($), 30% annual growth, Initial 
expense ($), Expenses decrease by 10% per 
year, High discount rate due to risk (40%)
Calculates future 
cash flow
Terminal value using the 
perpetuity growth model 
with a long-term 5% 
growth assumption
Discounts cash 
flows to present 
value

314 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
Unfortunately, inputting some numbers and receiving a precise number doesn’t
always work. Formulas can become more complex than that. People may negotiate
about the parameters. Some might argue that because a specific start-up operates in a
high-risk industry, it should have a higher discount rate. Others might say that some
figures in the planning documents are too speculative to yield substantial results.
 In general, it’s difficult to quantify all possible risks. What if the principal founder
leaves? What if a corporate giant suddenly brings a similar product to the market?
What if there are macroeconomic shifts or unexpected tariffs that affect the world
economy?
 For many early-stage start-ups, valuation is merely a means to assign a numerical
value to a company. Every founder wants to impress others with good numbers. As
hardly anyone will acquire an early-stage start-up, nobody denies founders the right to
boast about their creativity in front of other founders.
 When a start-up seeks to raise money and negotiations with investors begin, the val-
uation serves as a baseline for further discussion. Then, the market will decide what
investors are ready to spend.
12.3.2 Dilution
Start-ups can raise multiple funding rounds at each stage of development. They can
raise money through debt (borrowing money) or equity (selling ownership). Raising
money through equity leads to dilution : preexisting owners will own fewer shares after
an investment round unless they participate in the investment round themselves.
 A founding round doesn’t mean the value of an earlier round decreases; if the
company’s overall value increases, it also means that the value per share is increasing.
After all, they use this money to enter new markets and acquire new clients. Let’s out-
line this in a simplified scenario:
1Fred and Lin started a company and issued 1,000,000 shares, with a 50/50 split.
2An investor offers $500,000 for 25% of the company in a seed round.
3To give the investor 25% equity, the company issues 333,333 new shares,
increasing the total number of shares to 1,333,333.
4Fred and Lin successfully acquire clients with this capital, increasing their over-
all valuation and the value per share.
Mark Zuckerberg started Facebook with 100% ownership. By the time of its IPO in
2012, his stake was just over 28%. Despite dilution, Facebook was worth $104 billion at
the IPO, making Zuckerberg’s ownership worth billions. Dilution isn’t always bad—
owning a smaller percentage of a highly valuable company is often better than owning
100% of a struggling one. Let’s use sample data to model dilution across multiple
funding rounds in Python.
NOTE Some founders almost sabotage themselves with the idea that if they
sell shares of their company, they will lose control over the product. If a
founder is passionate about their product and expects a vision to be created

315 12.3 Assessing start-ups
in all the details as they imagine it, they might risk failure. Successful found-
ers are deeply passionate about their business model.
Start-ups can’t treat funding rounds as an infinite moneymaking machine. Not only
do owners’ stakes decrease, but investors who buy themselves in want to see a business
that increases its earnings and is on the trajectory to profitability without requiring
constant new investment rounds.
 Let’s look at listing 12.2, which shows dilution. We use artificial data to demon-
strate how the ownership percentage decreases.
import pandas as pd
total_shares = 1_000_000            
founder_shares = 500_000            
funding_rounds = [
    ("Seed", 500_000, 25),          
    ("Series A", 2_000_000, 20),    
    ("Series B", 10_000_000, 15),   
    ("Series C", 50_000_000, 10)    
]
dilution_data = []
for round_name, investment, equity_given in funding_rounds:
    new_shares = (total_shares * 
                 (equity_given / 
                  (100 - equity_given)))                    
    total_shares += new_shares                              
    founder_ownership = (founder_shares / 
                         total_shares) * 100                
    dilution_data.append([round_name, 
                          investment, 
                          int(total_shares), 
                          round(founder_ownership, 2)])     
df = pd.DataFrame(dilution_data, 
                  columns=["Round", "Investment ($)", "Total Shares", 
"Founder Ownership (%)"])
df
This sample illustrates that with each subsequent funding round, the total number of
shares increases, while founder ownership decreases. Even though dilution happens,
the start-up raises millions, fueling growth. Earlier investors and founders will own less
over time, but their shares will be worth more.Listing 12.2 Calculating dilution
Sets parameters 
ownership details, 
funding rounds
Calculates 
dilution

316 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
12.3.3 Scoring
Statistics indicate that only a small percentage of start-ups survive. As this book is
about investing for programmers, and investing in start-ups is part of a comprehensive
investment strategy, the question arises whether we can use programming skills to
determine which start-up has a better chance of survival.
 The smaller the start-up, the lower the chances of gaining significant insights
through financial valuation. Let’s see if we can score start-ups through nonfinancial
parameters as well.
 The following subsections list the potential factors to consider in this evaluation.
Some of the insights we can get through large language models (LLMs). Other data is
also available from platforms such as LinkedIn or Crunchbase. In the following cate-
gories, we describe the insights that can be obtained and outline the possible steps a
programmer can take to retrieve the information.
INCUBATOR  AND ACCELERATOR
Each incubator or accelerator has a success rate. The more start-ups originating from
them succeed, the better. Investors who narrow their search parameters only to inte-
grate successful incubators or accelerators increase their chances of success. They
might focus on start-up programs affiliated with elite universities. We can ask LLMs to
provide us with a list of successful incubators and accelerators and use this informa-
tion as weighted model parameters.
FOUNDERS  AND ADVISORS
We can profile start-up founders and score them on various parameters. We can exam-
ine their overall experience in the businesses for which they plan to create their next
start-up, and review where they studied and with whom they have previously worked.
We’re also interested in their experience as founders and would like to know if they
have had exits before. 
 We can gather a wealth of information about founders on LinkedIn or other plat-
forms that contain data on professional achievements. We can also see if skills are
missing in a founder team. It’s also helpful to examine the company’s advisors. In
many cases, advisors with a solid track record on boards are a good sign.
EXISTING  INVESTORS
If we know who has already invested in that company, we can build a scorecard by rat-
ing the existing investors based on their success rate. Platforms such as Crunchbase
provide data on start-ups and their investors. Based on this, we can develop a scoring
system that incorporates certain parameters, for example, the volume of past invest-
ments. We then score investors based on factors such as size, success rates, and other
similar criteria.
CLIENTS  AND STRATEGIC  PARTNERSHIPS
If we know who their clients are, we can also forecast potential growth scenarios for start-
ups. In many cases, collecting data about client collaborations would require access to
confidential contracts, making it a topic of negotiation rather than a technical one.

317 12.3 Assessing start-ups
 Often, start-ups form strategic partnerships to expand and market their products.
If a start-up collaborates with a major player in its field, this adds value. Still, both cli-
ent relations and strategic partnerships are complex to rate, as many aspects are chal-
lenging to measure because various contracts and other documents related to
collaborations may not contain commitments from both sides, but rather statements
of intention.
COUNTRY  OF ORIGIN
Unicorns get their name because they are rare. Some countries attempt to breed uni-
corns, while others are less invested in this endeavor. You can look up the number of
unicorns by country and the number of unicorns per million people. Countries such
as Israel, for instance, do well.
 There’s a catch if you look for “start-up nations.” Some start-up teams may origi-
nate from one country but incorporate in another due to tax reasons and access to
markets. It’s no surprise that many founders of Delaware C corporations aren’t US
residents. Still, knowing the country of origin of a start-up team can be one item on
a scorecard.
DOMAIN
Trends that dictate the focus of start-ups often depend on technological break-
throughs. In the early 2000s, numerous innovations enabled the creation of more
advanced web pages, which we later referred to as Web 2.0. Start-up teams that were
capable of adopting these technologies faster than their competitors had the potential
to become hugely successful.
 Following the release of the iPhone, numerous companies emerged to develop
mobile apps. At the time of writing this book, if you look up start-up ideas, hardly any-
one would recommend that you build apps. Now, the world is seeking innovations in
quantum computing, AI, nuclear energy, improved storage technologies, and carbon
capture. The times of consumer apps are over.
 Domains can also be scored by risk. Think of domains in the early stages, such as
geoengineering, in which you look for large-scale interventions to fix the climate or
new nuclear reactor types. If companies in risky fields succeed, the rewards are higher.
REGULATION
Think of two categories of start-ups: a biotech company that researches new mRNA
vaccines and an IT company that builds a new messenger platform that incorporates
AI. We don’t need to guess which of these two start-ups will face heavy regulation and
which one won’t. More regulations mean more risk.
ECONOMIC  MOAT
Let’s stick with the example from the previous subsection and imagine the biotech
company is successful, creating a new type of vaccine. Who faces more risks through
competition? The IT company that builds a new messenger platform doesn’t have
much room to defend itself from competitors. If a new start-up creates a better mes-
senger platform, it might still fail. However, a successful biotech start-up, which has

318 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
likely patented its products that contributed to its success, can’t be easily displaced
from its success by a competitor. An economic moat isn’t always easy to quantify, but
we can evaluate companies within their respective industries and explore various
parameters to assess this key factor.
CAPITAL  INTENSITY  AND BURN RATE
While we stick to our previous example, we can also take them as a reference for capi-
tal intensity and burn rate. The biotech company is likely capital-intensive. A signifi-
cant amount of money is required for a lab and a minimum staff size. They would also
have to spend a considerable amount of money on equipment and likely hire patent
lawyers and officers who are well-versed in regulations, ensuring that all trials run
smoothly. Compare this to IT companies that need budgets for notebooks and some
cloud services to get started. They often need to spend money on licenses, as many
tools are open source.
 Capital intensity is often also expressed using a metric called burn rate , which refers
to the amount a start-up spends in a given period. Start-ups with a high burn rate and
a lengthy path to profitability are inherently risky.
BUSINESS  MODEL
First-time founders might wonder what app to build. Experienced founders may won-
der how to monetize their business model. As investors, we can adopt a more
informed approach to evaluate business models, as our destiny doesn’t depend on
them, which makes it easier to differentiate between the product being created and its
monetization.
NETWORK  EFFECT
Investors such as Peter Thiel view the network effect as essential. Facebook, for
example, is a product that started small and focused on a specific scenario. However,
with a blue ocean market ahead of them, they were able to scale worldwide, as sud-
denly everyone gravitated toward a product that allowed them to present themselves
to the world.
 Perhaps it’s harder today to build a new social media platform, as the market is
already saturated. However, every investor dreams of finding a product that not every-
one has, but where it’s certain that it’s only a matter of time until everyone wants it.
INDIVIDUAL  NORTH STAR METRICS
You can ask a founder the question, “What is the one metric you keep screening and
that will make you smile once it reaches a certain milestone?” For a social media com-
pany, it might be 1 million subscribers. For a company selling products, the customer
acquisition costs might be below x USD.
 Each domain may have a different North Star Metric. If you find these metrics, you
can likely monitor their chance of a breakthrough over time.

319 Summary
Summary
Investing in start-ups may be the riskiest investment, but it can pay off tremen-
dously if the venture is successful.
Some experts in venture capital (VC) say you invest more in people and busi-
ness models, and less in the product.
Start-ups progress through distinct stages, each with specific investment
requirements:
– Pre-seed start-ups often serve as a reference point for founders with an idea
who are working on a minimum viable product (MVP) to demonstrate the
product’s potential.
– Seed start-ups are companies that aim to transform a successful MVP into a
full-fledged product that can be sold to customers.
– Series A companies typically have paying customers; their primary role is to
develop and refine a working product for the mass market or to meet the
advanced requirements of customers.
– Series B companies must retain their existing customers and strive to expand
into new markets.
– Series C companies have gained some market dominance and primarily
strive for a successful exit, typically through an acquisition or an initial public
offering (IPO).
Most founders view unsuccessful exits as badges of honor, which can help
attract more investments.
VC-backed start-ups don’t exist to grow slowly. If a company takes VC, the goal is
to get acquired or go public.
Retail investors can’t directly invest in a prominent VC’s likely next unicorn, but
if you have enough capital, you can still gain exposure to private equity through
VC funds.
There are various start-up valuation methods. DCF values start-ups based on
their future expected cash flows, which are discounted for risk.
Investors and fund managers of a VC firm expect a start-up to work hard toward
achieving an exit.
Angel syndicates are alternatives to VCs and enable investors with smaller check
sizes to invest in start-ups.
A lead investor of an angel syndicate commonly incorporates a special purpose
vehicle (SPV) that, when invested in a start-up, is added to a start-up’s cap table.
VCs don’t just look at DCF; they compare it to market trends and past acquisitions.
Each funding round adds new shares, reducing existing ownership percent-
ages. This is known as dilution, and it’s an inevitable consequence in venture-
backed start-ups.
You can use data and programming skills to score start-ups on nonfinancial
aspects.

320 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
For a scoring model of start-ups, you can explore parameters such as the success
chance based on the incubator/accelerator, founders, existing investors, cli-
ents, strategic partnerships, country of origin, domain, regulations, economic
moats, capital intensity, burn rate, business model, network effect, and individ-
ual North Star Metrics.

321The road goes ever
on and on
Congratulations! You made it this far. In this final chapter, we explore possible next
steps in your journey to use your programming skills to make wise investment deci-
sions. Some of the discussion is about behavioral finance, as managing yourself is
often a central criterion for success. It will complete your view, allowing you to
begin your journey.This chapter covers
Getting advice
Realizing knowledge alone doesn’t make you 
a financial advisor
Being a digital nomad to get you closer to 
financial freedom
Preventing irrational decisions with control 
measures
Seeing index funds as the safest choice 
after all

322 CHAPTER  13 The road goes ever on and on
13.1 Getting advice
Imagine embarking on a journey to a distant country with a different culture, having
prepared for it only by reading books. If you’re a frequent traveler, you know that in
some countries, you’ll encounter situations that no travel guide can prepare you for.
It’s the same with investment. Books don’t provide financial advice on how to deal
with specific situations. Investments are time-sensitive. Even if a writer had a good idea
about a purchase decision at the time of writing, the decision criteria might have
changed when the reader reads that information. This book aims to equip you with
the techniques to assess financial assets. The decision to invest—or not—must ulti-
mately be yours.
 If you’re new to investing, not knowing what you don’t know is a risk. In this book,
we introduced the Dunning-Kruger effect, which underlines that people new to a field
often overestimate their skills. Some new and overconfident investors learn some les-
sons the hard way. The question is whether the hours of frustration and the loss of
money are worth it.
 Learning lessons through low-stakes investing can be a good start. You can invest
only a minimal amount of money in riskier assets to build experience gradually until
you’re ready for bigger stakes. If you’ve never consulted a financial or tax advisor, con-
sider doing so before making significant investments. Ensure that any advisor you
choose has the necessary experience and credentials.
 Additionally, Reddit and other social media platforms are excellent resources for
seeking advice and obtaining a peer review of investment ideas. Just be cautious; some
“experts” on social media, who confidentially recommend you make bold moves to
get rich fast, may be affected by the Dunning-Kruger effect when offering guidance.
Always be aware that there are also many scammers on social media. As usual, the
more people you ask, the more opinions you get, and the more chances you have that
critical thinking helps you develop a good strategy.
 Taxation is another crucial factor that investors shouldn’t ignore. Specific strate-
gies may optimize your returns depending on your citizenship and tax residency. Even
if an investment appears outstanding based on fundamental analysis, tax-efficient
alternatives sometimes offer better overall returns.
 This book explores how large language models (LLMs) can serve as powerful
research assistants. Using LLMs to determine what to ask the human tax consultant
might make sense. However, AI often lacks full context and can make mistakes. If you
provide basic details about your citizenship, tax residency, and income, AI may suggest
strategies you can validate with a professional financial advisor, such as reducing with-
holding taxes.
 Many experts have opinions on how and when AI chatbots replace human advisors
or when the advice of an AI is tough to beat. Remember that AI is trained on data cre-
ated by humans, so it’s likely that some specific strategies you might come up with can
be unique. By building your Retrieval-Augmented Generations (RAGs) with investor-
related information on fields that interest you, optimizing prompts, and using AI

323 13.2 Alpha hunter
agents to orchestrate workflows, you can have one LLM validate the results of other
LLMs. This approach offers no limits to creativity in using AI. And chances are good
that with every new model that is released, you see more sophistication and fewer
hallucinations.
 Some developers who shared their experiences about vibe coding sessions, where
t he y le t  AI  c re ate  c o de , fo und  o ne  b ig be havio r al p ro bl em :  t he y “g et  l azy” t o  s o lve
problems themselves. Instead of examining the code to identify areas for improve-
ment, they write a single prompt, submit it, do something else in the meantime, such
as checking social media, and then check the results. When the AI-generated code
doesn’t work well, they copy and paste the error message and submit another prompt.
Many programmers conclude that they often could have created some solutions faster
if they hadn’t used AI (while also admitting that no human can be faster than any AI
to write code in some situations, so context matters). One AI-related piece of advice is
to beware of falling into the trap of relying on AI for everything. The more advanced
they get, the more tempting it will be.
13.2 Stay curious
In this book, we emphasize the importance of investing in businesses we understand.
One way to become a better investor is to stay curious and learn as much as possible
about companies. Research them, learn about their operations, and speak with people
who have experience with them. Many audiobooks and podcasts explain how the
investment world operates, offering numerous insights that can inform your invest-
ment decisions.
 Sometimes, you meet new people and aren’t sure what to discuss. Take this chance
to learn more about a profession. With that knowledge, you can conduct your
research and gather significant expertise to answer questions from others in a similar
field. One important trait is having active listening skills, which helps make your inter-
view partner feel more comfortable sharing about their work.
13.3 Alpha hunter
After reading this book, you might feel tempted to create alpha portfolios that outper-
form the market and sell your strategies to clients. Before pitching your ideas to
friends and family, consider this: even highly experienced investors with strong finan-
cial backgrounds make mistakes and lose money. Giving direct investment advice can
damage relationships.
 Even if you become skilled at evaluating assets—something we’ve demonstrated
is possible for those with strong analytical abilities—you must face a hard truth:
proving financial success requires effort and time. While you can showcase back-
tested statistics and historical simulations, what truly matters to fund managers,
banks, and clients is whether you have skin in the game. When you demonstrate
consistent performance over the years and explain how you achieved it, serious
investors may start paying attention.

324 CHAPTER  13 The road goes ever on and on
 Regardless of your approach, expect one common question: “With so many estab-
lished investment firms—BlackRock, Berkshire Hathaway, Vanguard—boasting decades
of data and proven strategies, why do you believe you can do better?” If you can’t
deliver a convincing answer that stands up to experts in the field, it’s probably not
time to launch your start-up.
 One alternative to going solo is forming an investment group. Collaborating with
others enables peer reviews, which strengthens your skills and credibility. Additionally,
various platforms enable you to share insights, and some even offer monetization
options, allowing investors to subscribe to your group for a fee.
 If you intend to charge others for financial services, be sure to also review the reg-
ulations in your country. While it’s okay to weigh out the best investment opportuni-
ties among friends, reaching out to potential clients to charge them for your advice is
a business, and this business, in most countries, requires a license. Before attempting
to monetize, always verify the regulations of your local market regarding the require-
ments for being a financial advisor.
13.4 Nomadism
Some readers may approach this book as a step toward achieving financial freedom,
perhaps even as a means to escape the constraints of corporate jobs and pursue a
more fulfilling life. For those living in high-cost countries, digital nomadism can be
a significant milestone on that journey.
 Being a digital nomad isn’t just about exploring new places, meeting people, and
having adventures. It can also mean lowering your living costs and tax burden. As a
programmer, you have the unique advantage of location independence, whether
building your start-up or working with multiple clients remotely.
 As mentioned earlier, consulting a knowledgeable tax advisor can help you deter-
mine whether relocating to a country with a digital nomad program is financially ben-
eficial. Some countries offer attractive tax incentives, including reduced income tax
and capital gains tax, which can make such a move a significant step toward financial
independence.
 However, there are challenges to consider. Your citizenship may affect the ease
with which you can obtain a visa. Many countries with digital nomad programs aim to
protect local businesses from unfair competition, which often means you’re only per-
mitted to work for clients outside your new country of residence.
 Freelancers should also be mindful of corporate policies. While many companies
support remote work, some exclude certain countries as locations for fulfillment. You
sign a contract, try to log in from your notebook on the corporate network, and
you’re suddenly blacklisted because your IP address doesn’t match. You can prevent
that beforehand by ensuring that your client is okay if you work from your new coun-
try of residence.
 While lower living costs and favorable tax rates can be appealing, be aware of the
potential effect of inflation and currency fluctuations. The value of some local currencies

325 13.5 Activist investing
has sharply declined over time, potentially eroding your purchasing power. However,
as you’ve gained some financial literacy in this book, you can also assess the risks by
studying the Forex charts.
 If you’re freelancing, building a strong online presence is essential. Platforms such
as Upwork, Toptal, and LinkedIn can help you showcase your expertise, attract clients,
and establish a sustainable remote career.
 If you plan to work as a remote consultant to earn money as an investor, remem-
ber the basic lessons learned in this book about interest rates. When the interest
rates of a central bank are high, borrowing money is more expensive. Thus, starting
your career as a freelancer is easier when interest rates are low and more projects
are on the market.
13.5 Activist investing
In chapter 2, we noted that younger generations, who have many years ahead of them,
tend to be more concerned about environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
issues than earlier generations. Organizational frameworks, such as diversity, equity,
and inclusion (DEI) or “my country first,” have also gained influence. While some
may prefer to ignore them to avoid painful debates with evangelists of each side, we
must acknowledge that we’re experiencing a growing divide between political stand-
points that may also influence the investment decisions of many individuals and even
organizations.
 Many consumers are value-driven and don’t purchase products from companies
that fail to share their ethical concerns. But what about investment? Most of this book
was about how to increase your wealth through investing. Would you buy shares of a
company you dislike but whose share price growth outlook is excellent? As getting
richer may not be everyone’s top priority, we need to ask the following: Can individual
investors affect a company’s success through their investment decisions? How much
money would a single investor need to invest to influence the fate of a company?
 The financial world has seen activist investors such as Carl Icahn and Bill Ackman,
who buy significant stakes in companies—often 10% or more—to influence board
decisions. However, the average private investor’s equity in firms is usually statistically
insignificant, and they won’t significantly affect corporate strategy, even if they invest
their entire wealth in one company.
 So, unless you’re a billionaire, it’s doubtful that a CEO of the Magnificent Seven
will call you to thank you for your investment. However, as we’ve seen in chapter 12 on
private equity and start-up investment, the smaller a company is, the greater the effect
single investors can have. You might face a dilemma though even if you acquire
enough shares to push for change in a company for ethical reasons. Suppose the com-
pany profits significantly from controversial, but legal, actions. If you become a lead-
ing investor and get a seat on the board, you can change the business approach.
However, investing in a company to cut its primary income is akin to climbing a large
tree to cut off the branch you’re sitting on.

326 CHAPTER  13 The road goes ever on and on
 Perhaps only the ultra-wealthy have the privilege of investing in groundbreaking
technologies that can reshape industries. But, as societal values evolve, ethical invest-
ing may become an increasingly powerful force that shapes markets in ways we’re only
beginning to understand.
 In his Yale Financial Markets course, Professor Robert F. Shiller indicated that
investors may have a moral duty to improve their environment. As you become more
prosperous, you should become more invested in philanthropic projects. However, if
changing the world is your ultimate goal, remember that some entrepreneurs have
taken it too far, committing fraud in the name of effective altruism. Never forget that
investing is a business first. You need to excel at it if you hope to make even a slight
change in the world.
13.6 Measures of control
Whether you follow this book’s advice to stay cautious or take a more aggressive
approach, you may eventually invest significant money in assets. In one extreme sce-
nario, you experience rapid gains, fueling confidence and leading you to start plan-
ning your early retirement. However, overconfidence often leads to costly mistakes.
Countless books warn about cognitive biases and market risks, yet some investors
downplay them, investing  heavily  without considering the potential downside. You may
think you’re brighter than others and ignore all the warnings. When reality strikes,
the consequences can be severe. Imagine someone who quits their job, declaring
themselves financially free, only to face unexpected losses. In extreme cases, they may
find themselves returning to their former employer and asking HR to reverse their
resignation to stay financially afloat.
13.6.1 Checks and balances
Minor miscalculations can compound into significant problems. One way to mitigate
these risks is by implementing checks and balances  in your decision-making process. 
 One example of checks and balances comes in the form of peer reviews . Discussing
strategies with experienced investors who can challenge your views can provide valu-
able insights. Some investors often feel compelled to make investments quickly
because they fear that an opportunity will pass. Some refer to this as FOMO, or the
fear of missing out. Still, often it makes sense to wait with a buy order. Meet with a
friend and explain why you want to buy the shares. The more you need to justify
your actions with arguments, the more you’ll discover if you’re on to something.
The more you engage with brilliant, critical thinkers who offer different perspec-
tives, the better equipped you’ll be to make sound financial decisions and avoid
costly pitfalls.
 Another practical approach is conducting regular retrospectives  to assess past invest-
ment decisions and refine future strategies. For that, you need to write down why you
invested in an asset. Then, you continue to review your decision, and even after you’ve
sold your asset, you may still refer to your notes. Sometimes, you might have to accept

327 13.6 Measures of control
that you must learn a lesson to improve. But this again means that you likely pre-
vented yourself from making a mistake twice.
 One practice that many investors do is to document everything. We may refer to
this as an investment diary. For every decision they make, they document the exact
reasons for doing so and the associated expectations. If they review their choices a few
months or years later, they can reassess the situation and apply the lessons learned.
Based on these learnings, many investors follow principles and strict rule sets for their
investment decisions.
13.6.2 Gain distance
Some investors take a thoughtful approach, carefully analyzing decisions and consid-
ering long-term outcomes. However, once they invest, they step back and check in
only occasionally to ensure things are on track.
 However, maintaining this level of detachment becomes possible if you own a lim-
ited number of assets. Having an over-diversified portfolio with maybe a hundred
assets or more is a challenge. If you reach a point where you no longer remember why
you invested in a particular company—or worse, if you see a stock ticker in your port-
folio and have to look up what company it belongs to—you may have lost control over
your investments.
 A better strategy is to focus on a manageable number of businesses you understand
well. Investing in companies you can track and evaluate is more effective than clutter-
ing your portfolio with assets that sounded exciting at the time. Simplification leads to
better decision-making and stronger conviction in your investments.
 Another essential part is to not make decisions based on strong emotions. In an
era where you can make investment decisions 24/7 from anywhere, it also means you
can create a buy order at a party while drinking with a friend who shares an outstand-
ing investment opportunity, promising a 10x return because the company is excellent.
A hangover might not be the worst thing you wake up with.
13.6.3 Programmer’s journey
This book is for programmers and data analysts who are new to the world of investing.
It bridges the gap between your technical expertise and financial concepts, showing
you how to apply your analytical skills to achieve better investment outcomes. The
examples provided are intentionally straightforward, allowing you to run them on a
standard notebook or a simple cloud setup.
 For those seeking a greater challenge, your programming skills open the door to
more sophisticated applications in quantitative finance. While this book focuses on
the fundamentals, you can explore advanced models on your own. For instance, you
could experiment with time series forecasting using AutoRegressive Integrated Mov-
ing Average (ARIMA) models or delve into complex quantitative finance theories.
 If you have access to significant computational resources, you might even explore
high-frequency trading (HFT), an area where speed and algorithmic complexity

328 CHAPTER  13 The road goes ever on and on
provide a competitive edge. This field is dominated by hedge funds and specialized
investment firms that dedicate massive resources to forecasting market movements
and executing trades in fractions of a second.
13.6.4 Playing it safe
As a final observation, my conclusion is the same in all my journeys. In discussions
about efficient market theory, many individuals claim to beat the market. Some indi-
viduals brag about staggering results with speculative trades, often backed by “bro
advice” or vague technical analysis.
 Many of these “star traders” have a story about their huge gains, but they won’t tell
you how much they lost on the way. And if you check in years later, often they tell you
that they stopped trading without wanting to give you a reason why.
 At the same time, you read about investors who got rich and where it’s proven
that they beat the market. You might want to study people such as Warren Buffett,
Peter Lynch, and George Soros. Like the book Outliers: The Story of Success  by Mal-
colm Gladwell (Little Brown and Company, 2008), which examines individuals who
excel with extraordinary business performance, you should investigate whether the
same pattern exists.
 Some believe that following principles helps people make the best decisions when
stressed and emotional. Investor Ray Dalio wrote a book, Principle: Life and Work  (Avid
Reader Press, 2017), about this. Many investors spend considerable time researching
their assets. One principle is to make rational decisions and learn from mistakes.
 So m e i ndivi du als  have  b e co m e ri ch in e m er ging  mar ke ts . The  cryp to  m arke t  is
one of them, but consider Russia in the 1990s when the country was effectively up for
grabs. After the collapse of the Soviet Union and the transition to capitalism, the Rus-
sian state rapidly privatized industries through programs such as the “voucher privat-
ization” and “loans-for-shares” schemes. In the chaos, well-connected and often ruthless
businessmen were able to acquire state-owned assets—particularly in natural resources,
energy, and banking—at a fraction of their value. A small group of these individuals
became immensely wealthy and came to be known as Russia’s oligarchs. 
 Investors in emerging markets often face fewer challenges in finding suitable
investment opportunities; however, they must also be cautious to avoid being tricked
or scammed. Emerging markets can be roller-coaster rides. Not everyone is in for the
long ride. Some people want to avoid the stress. One way to do that is to pick an index
or world fund. Select one that is tax-optimized for you and proceed. You spend your
time relaxing and occasionally return to your portfolio.
 In Shiller’s Yale Financial Markets course mentioned earlier, he recommends allo-
cating 80% of your money to index funds and reserving 20% for stocks. Success grows
with an understanding of the business you invest in. If you start there and consistently
outperform the other 80%, you can still adjust the ratio.
 When you do your own research about index funds—or even world funds, that dis-
tribute all the positions on assets worldwide—you’ll also find a lot of other people

329 Summary
giving the same advice: put everything in an index fund, come back in some years,
and you’ll be happy with the results. What an index fund doesn’t do, however, is find
the growth potential in businesses that you understand well and that can outperform
the market, as shown in this book.
 Lastly, ensure that investing doesn’t interfere with your life. You might be off track
if you spend most of your day just tracking prices and watching what goes up or down.
After all, if you strive for freedom by becoming an investment prodigy, remember that
you’re not truly free if the desire to live independently consumes all of your time and
energy. In the end, in the wise words of Gandalf in J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the
Rings , “All we have to decide is what we do with the time that is given to us.”
Summary
Seeking advice before making significant investments is almost always a wise
decision.
Discussing potential investments with a friend and charging clients for your
advice are distinct actions. For the latter, you likely need a business license.
Staying curious about businesses is one way to accumulate a wealth of knowl-
edge, enabling sound investment decisions over time.
Becoming a digital nomad enables you to pick countries with favorable tax con-
ditions. Some countries may not have taxes on capital appreciation.
Become aware that your investment also supports a company. Sometimes, you
might not want to support specific companies, even if you might benefit
financially.
The smaller the company, the more effect your investment has.
You can become your own most significant obstacle to getting rich if you act
irrationally. Establish checks and balances to minimize the effect of strong
emotions.
You can document every investment decision and then later use a retrospective
to find potential learnings to improve your investment process.
Occasionally, it helps to take a step back and reevaluate situations with a clear
mind.
Many investors claim that new investors are best off with an index or world fund.
Patience and a stoic mindset may be the key ingredients to achieving wealth in
the long run.

330appendix
Setting up the environment
Some of you may prefer cloud services, while others of you prefer to use your own
devices. Many programmers are familiar with specific tools to replace the ones
shown in the book, allowing them to choose their final configuration independently.
In this appendix, we list options for each category. We’ll demonstrate how to inte-
grate cloud services, manage source code, select development environments, and
export data.
 To work with financial assets, you’ll need to register with a broker or exchange.
In this book, I’ll demonstrate using Alpaca, Interactive Brokers, and Binance.
You’re free to use other providers, but in that case, you’ll need to handle data
access and integration on your own. Be aware that because these are platforms that
host financial data, they require some extra security procedures such as a Know
Your Customer (KYC) process. Suppose you feel uncomfortable with using a broker
as a backend, or your broker doesn’t support remote access through an API. In that
case, you can always create a small relational database that contains tables with all
your positions.
 This appendix highlights only the basic actions, but doesn’t explain all the
details required for possible environments. For detailed instructions on setting up
a framework or service for your specific environment, do some web research or
consult a large language model (LLM).
A.1 Python
Python is the lingua franca of data analytics. It provides key data structures and fea-
tures to facilitate efficient data analysis. Since its beginnings in the 1990s, Python
has developed a growing library of tools that excel in all aspects of data explora-
tion, including data retrieval and visualization.

331 A.1 Python
 Many operating systems come with a preinstalled Python version. You can use this
Python installation locally or create a virtual environment for your exploration. Most
experts recommend the latter because it allows you to install as many custom libraries
as you want and update each library without risking conflicts with other libraries for
different use cases.
 In this book, we use Python 3.13, the latest version available at the time of writ-
ing. The Python community provides new versions every year. As Python is mature,
functional changes that remove backward compatibility are rare. In most cases, the
exercises should run with slightly older or newer versions of the programming lan-
guage. You can determine your Python version by running the following command
in the console:
Python ––version
If you don’t have a Python interpreter installed, follow the instructions on
www.python.org  to set up your Python environment. You can also check the availabil-
ity of the package manager pip on your system, which allows you to install libraries for
data exploration. For example, you can install these three libraries, which we fre-
quently use in this book, in this way:
pip install yfinance pandas numpy
This book relies heavily on the pandas and matplotlib libraries in most samples. If you
still have a lot to learn about using Python or these two libraries, we recommend
catching up before delving into programming examples.
NOTE Developers can port the code in this book to other languages if they
offer similar libraries to Python. Just don’t underestimate the effort required,
as some libraries, such as a port of yfinance, might not be available for every
language.
We list the libraries used in this book in table A.1. Be aware that for some of these
tools, you need to register on a platform and get API keys.
Table A.1 Python libraries used in this book by chapter
Library Link Chapter Key required
python-dotenv https://pypi.org/project/python-dotenv/ 3N o
yfinance https://pypi.org/project/yfinance/ 3N o
pandas https://pypi.org/project/pandas/ 3N o
NumPy https://pypi.org/project/numpy/ 3N o
matplotlib https://pypi.org/project/matplotlib/ 3N o

332 APPENDIX Setting up the environment
A.2 Secrets manager
The most crucial section of the whole setup is securing API keys and secrets. An unau-
thorized person who gets access to them can cause harm. For that reason, we need to
protect them as much as possible. Listing A.1 uses the python-dotenv library to load
secret keys from a file named .env.
 
 
 finviz https://pypi.org/project/finviz/ 3Y e s
openbb https://pypi.org/project/openbb/ 3Y e s
alpha-vantage https://pypi.org/project/alpha-vantage/ 3Y e s
eodhd https://pypi.org/project/eodhd/ 3Y e s
pytrends https://pypi.org/project/pytrends/ 4N o
Alpaca-py https://pypi.org/project/alpaca-py/ 6Y e s
ib_insync https://pypi.org/project/ib-insync/ 6N o
python_binance https://pypi.org/project/python-binance/ 6Y e s
SQLAlchemy https://pypi.org/project/SQLAlchemy/ 6N o
CurrencyConverter https://pypi.org/project/CurrencyConverter/ 6N o
scikit-learn https://pypi.org/project/scikit-learn/ 8N o
statsmodels https://pypi.org/project/statsmodels/ 8N o
openai https://pypi.org/project/openai/ 8Y e s
google-genai https://pypi.org/project/google-genai/ 8Y e s
google-generativeai https://pypi.org/project/google-generativeai/ 8Y e s
anthropic https://pypi.org/project/anthropic/ 8Y e s
transformers https://pypi.org/project/transformers/ 8N o
langchain https://pypi.org/project/langchain/ 9N o
Langchain-community https://pypi.org/project/langchain-community/ 9N o
Langchain-openai https://pypi.org/project/langchain-openai/ 9Y e s
Langchain-core https://pypi.org/project/langchain-core/ 9N o
mplfinance https://pypi.org/project/mplfinance/ 10 No
streamlit https://pypi.org/project/streamlit/ 10 NoTable A.1 Python libraries used in this book by chapter  (continued)
Library Link Chapter Key required

333 A.3 Source code repository
import os
import requests
from dotenv import load_dotenv
load_dotenv()
NOTION_TOKEN = os.getenv("doc.notion.api")
DATABASE_ID = os.getenv("doc.notion.db")
Suppose the .env file in the directory where the code is executed contains key-value
pairs assigning values to the keys doc.notion.api  and doc.notion.db . In that case,
the library loads the values and later assigns them to variables. We can apply these con-
cepts to all keys that we want to load, including usernames and passwords.
 Be aware that python-dotenv is just a minimum-security measure and helps you to
separate hardcoded API keys from the source code. We can use a secrets manager,
which takes security even one step further. If someone runs code locally on their com-
puter, they can use HashiCorp Vault. In addition, there are custom solutions for each
environment. If you’re using a Mac, take a look at the keyring library. Be sure to invest
some time in exploring the best way to secure your keys as much as possible based on
your environment.
A.3 Source code repository
The choice of a remote git server, such as GitHub or GitLab, doesn’t make a differ-
ence. Both solutions do the job, and deciding which one to use depends on personal
preference.
 While we don’t need to explain to programmers the benefits of a source code
repository, and most programmers will be able to create their own repositories, we
n e e d  t o  h i g h l i g h t  t h e  r i s k  o f  a c c i d e n t a l l y  c o m m i t t i n g  A P I  k e y s  i n  p l a i n  t e x t .  S o m e
remote git repositories offer features to detect if keys are pushed to a server by mis-
take, and you can also use private Git repositories to mitigate the possible impact of
pushing keys by accident. We can’t stress enough that the best protection for your keys
is to prevent them from leaving your secured environment from the beginning.
NOTE When using API keys to trade on financial platforms, it’s always better
to be safe than sorry. If you feel that there’s even the slightest risk that an
unauthorized party could gain access to the keys, change them. All platforms
offer methods to make access keys invalid.
One way to prevent a file from being uploaded to a remote cloud repository is to add
the file names containing the keys, such as the .env file, as shown previously, to the list
of files your source code repository will ignore. A git-add  will check the content of a
.gitignore file and ignore all files and directories that match the patterns specified in
the file.Listing A.1 Using python-dotenv

334 APPENDIX Setting up the environment
A.4 Development environment
In this book, we use Jupyter Notebooks. A Jupyter Notebook is an interactive environ-
ment that executes code in single cells. It can be run in its native environment, Jupy-
ter, or a hosted setup using an Integrated Development Environment (IDE). What
makes Jupyter Notebooks unique is that they provide an interactive environment. You
can execute code in one cell and use the results of earlier executions in a different
cell. This interactivity offers flexibility and is particularly well-suited for research-ori-
ented approaches. Let’s explore some of the typical environments.
A.4.1 Anaconda
Jupyter can be installed as a Python standalone library using the pip package manager.
However, developers can use Jupyter when it’s integrated into a development environ-
ment. Figure A.1 illustrates a Jupyter Notebook running in Anaconda, an open source
data science and AI platform that supports Python and R programming languages.
Anaconda provides an entire environment for data scientists, including the package
manager conda, which follows similar principles to pip. Refer to the installation rou-
tine on the Anaconda web page ( https:/ /mng.bz/Rwoa ).
Figure A.1 A Jupyter Notebook running in Anaconda in a web browser

335 A.4 Development environment
 Many cloud-hosted environments offer notebooks, including AWS Sagemaker, Azure
Machine Learning, Google Colab, and JetBrains Datalore. Developers who don’t want
to install anything in their local environment can use these hosted environments.
A.4.2 Visual Studio Code
Visual Studio Code (VS Code), shown in figure A.2, is a standard IDE that runs on
most operating systems provided by Microsoft. It’s also trendy among Mac and Linux
users because it’s free and offers many functionalities. Download and install VS Code
for your operating system based on the vendor’s instructions at https:/ /mng.bz/15BR .
A.4.3 PyCharm
Many developers prefer PyCharm, an IDE specifically designed for Python program-
mers (figure A.3). PyCharm offers numerous features of interest to Python program-
mers. It’s available in a paid pro edition and a free community edition. The producer
JetBrains also provides other useful developer tools, such as DataGrip, to manage SQL
databases.
 Install PyCharm according to the vendor’s instructions. PyCharm Pro isn’t
required, but it can facilitate some programming activities.
 
 
 
 
Figure A.2 The VS Code environment with Jupyter Notebooks

336 APPENDIX Setting up the environment
A.5 Cloud
This book demonstrates how to access and store financial data using databases and
APIs securely. In the examples, we run data science notebooks on a local system.
Alternatively, you can execute everything in cloud services that allow hosting Jupyter
Notebooks.
 Some programmers shy away from using one of the big cloud providers because
they need to follow a KYC process and provide credit card information for registra-
tion, and not everyone feels comfortable doing this for private projects. For each ser-
vice you use locally, you can replace it with a cloud-based option. Besides options
hosted on large cloud providers, there are likely free versions from smaller providers
that don’t require any credit card information. 
A.5.1 Database
The first item to replace, if you want to get more advanced, is likely the SQLite data-
base we use in this book, which is excellent for explanatory scenarios. For more
advanced scenarios, there are limitations, however. One reference database provider
that allows you to use a simple database setup without a credit card is Supabase.
 We can use all forms of relational databases hosted on cloud providers. Of course,
cloud developers must also be familiar with opening access ports and setting up and
configuring databases in the cloud. Every cloud provider has extensive material on
how to do this.
 This book uses the SQL Alchemy library to read and write database data. A devel-
oper, therefore, only needs to replace the connection string if they want to change the
backend.
Figure A.3 PyCharm with Jupyter Notebooks

337 A.7 LLMs
A.5.2 Cloud secrets managers
Users who use a public cloud can also use the secrets managers provided by these plat-
forms. We can then use these libraries from Python scripts or command-line tools. List-
ing A.2 shows how to use the Boto3 library to access AWS Secrets Manager. Each big
cloud provider has its own secrets management solution. Pick the one you like best.
client = boto3.client('secretsmanager')
try:
    response = client.get_secret_value(SecretId=secret_name)
    secret = json.loads(response['SecretString'])
    return secret
except Exception as e:
    print(f"Error retrieving secret: {e}")
    return None
While the secret manager solutions from public cloud providers are secure, keep in
mind that cloud providers offer more sophisticated features to minimize risks. Cloud
endpoints may, for instance, accept only requests from limited IP ranges if security is
configured accordingly.
A.6 Export and documentation
In this book, we export data to note-taking platforms such as Notion or Google Sheets.
Both frameworks allow export with keys. You can access these services by creating an
account for each of them.
 You can replace these two platforms with all kinds of alternatives. The recommen-
dation is to use a centralized repository to store all research and responses from
LLMs, as this allows you to have a structured study. If you want to reassess a decision
you’ve made some time ago based on an LLM response, you can also use that
response and submit it as part of a prompt to ask an LLM if it still agrees with the orig-
inal assessment.
A.7 LLMs
Ever since LLMs went mainstream in IT, vendors have been racing to release ver-
sioned models to capture market share. We use four LLMs in this book: 
Anthropic
OpenAI
Google Gemini
AdaptLLM/finance-chat
Using frameworks such as LangChain, we unify the API and don’t have to manage
multiple vendor APIs. What we still need to prepare for is generating accounts on the
platforms, obtaining access keys, and occasionally purchasing a minimum number ofListing A.2 Accessing AWS Secret Manager using Boto3

338 APPENDIX Setting up the environment
credits. The detailed process of creating accounts and creating keys is out of this
book’s scope. LLM chatbots typically do a great job explaining how to create an
account on their platform and generate API keys, which can be used in Python.
A.8 Brokers and exchanges
We use brokers for stocks and bonds, and we use exchanges for stocks. Chapter 11
explains the difference between these categories. In this book, we use three platforms
to trade assets and gather data from them:
Interactive Brokers —A long-established international broker with a tremendous
amount of functionality
Alpaca —A developer-first broker with innovative APIs
Binance —A well-known cryptocurrency exchange
As many different brokers and exchanges are available worldwide, we must be aware
that every financial platform requires a KYC process, which requires customers to pro-
vide proof of their identity. This procedure is for your protection as investors. Verified
users who must authenticate to use a system are less likely to attempt fraud.
 While two platforms use API keys to authenticate, Interactive Brokers takes a dif-
ferent approach. Interactive Brokers uses a local installation of a tool called Trader
Workstation (TWS) to connect with a Python API. Sometimes, you need to configure
the API access with the TWS. Interactive Brokers provides information tailored to
your operating system.

339index
A
accelerator, explained 302 –303
accounting 20 –27
balance sheet 25
FCF (free cash flow) 26
income statement 22–25
accredited investors 5
actively managed ETFs 4
activist investing 325
AdaptLLM/finance-chat 
model 207
ADAS (Advanced Driver-Assis-
tance System) 81
ADRs (American Depositary 
Receipts) 71 , 132
AEB (Euronext 
Amsterdam) 132
AI agents 11 , 216
agentic workflows without 
frameworks 222–228
framework for 228–237
requirements 217–222
AI (artificial intelligence) 181
prompt engineering
208–213
alert, price 220
algorithmic trading 273
catalysts 278–282
nonfinancial data 274–278
orders 289–294
Alpaca
extracting data 128
orders 293Alpha Vantage 73
Anaconda 334
analytical investors
programmers as 16–17
risks and rewards 15
angel networks 309 –311
angel or venture capital 
investments 7
annual payout 108
ARIMA (AutoRegressive 
Integrated Moving 
Average) models 192 , 
327
asset monitor 123
architecture 124–126
enriching data 130–131
extracting data 127–129
processing assets 131–139
spreadsheets 126
assets 2 –8
bonds 4
choosing 8
cryptocurrency 5
derivatives 6
ETFs (exchange-traded 
funds) 4
forex (foreign exchange) 
market 5
funds 5
other assets 7
private equity 6
stocks 3
asset-specific risk 147
automated trading 12autonomous driving 80
ethics and security 81
known brands 82–84
AWS (Amazon Web 
Services) 232
AWS Data Exchange 276
B
B2B (business-to-business) 
companies 69 , 275
backtesting 283 –287
balance sheet 25 , 58
bar charts 251
BCG (Boston Consulting 
Group) Framework 106 , 
164, 223
bearish hypothesis 24
behavioral finance 182
big data 276 –278
big companies 276
demographic data 277
media 277
movement data 277
Big Short, The  (film) 275
bikeshedding 146
blockchain 6
Bollinger Bands 260 –262
bonds 4 , 112–116, 137
breakout 249
brokers
exchanges 338
orders 289
Buffett, Warren 30 , 275

INDEX 340
bullish hypothesis 22
burn rate 45 , 318
business model, validating
301–302
buying overperformers 177
C
candlesticks 254 –256
anatomy of candlestick 
chart 254
patterns 256
CapEx (capital expenses) 26
capitalization 32
cash-secured put 162
catalysts 278 –282
disasters 281
distressed companies 279
earnings calls 281
events 165
interest rate changes 282
mergers and acquisitions
278
CCA (comparable company 
analysis) 312
CDOs (collateralized debt 
obligations) 116
CDS (credit default swap) 116
CFA (Chartered Financial 
Analyst) 113
charts 239 –253
alternative chart types
250–251
interpreting 249
interpreting price changes 
with 253–267
patterns 247–249
reading 246
Streamlit 267–271
classification approach 183
Coca-Cola Company 108
code generation 201
collecting data, commercial 
libraries 67
complex trading signals
287–289
contrarian investor 247
correlation 153 –156
coupon payments 113
coupons 4
covered call 161
credit risk 4credit spread 163
cryptocurrencies 5 , 138
crypto exchanges 290
curiosity 323
current ratio 34
cycles, economic, sectors and 30
D
DAG (directed acyclic 
graph) 234
Dalio, Ray 328
data
call 234–237
collecting, commercial 
libraries 67
exporting 337
extracting 127–129
financial data 53–54
loading 232
preparing 234
database, cloud 336
DATABASE_ID parameter 225
data collection 52
Alpha Vantage 73
EODHD 71
financial analysis 
platforms 54–56
Finviz 69
libraries 76
notebooks 57
OpenBB 75
yfinance 57–66
data science, notebooks 57
day trading 12
DCA (dollar-cost averaging)
158
DCF (discounted cash flow) 
method 37 , 312
DDL (Data Definition 
Language) 125 , 223
debt 36
D/E (debt-to-equity) ratio 36 , 
61
DEI (diversity, equity, and 
inclusion) 325
demographic data 277
derivatives 6 , 159–163
development environment 334
Anaconda 334
PyCharm 335
VS Code 335dilution 45 , 314
direct investment 7
disasters 281
distressed companies 279
diversification 163
dividends 40 , 106–112
growth 109
payout frequency 108
yield 108
documentation 337
Domain-Driven Design  (Evans) 19
Dunning-Kruger effect 322
E
earnings 36
calls 281
surprise 281
EBIT (Earnings Before Interest 
and Taxes) 36
economic cycles, sectors and 30
economic moat 84 , 107
EDGAR (Electronic Data 
Gathering, Analysis, and 
Retrieval system) 232
efficient market theory 193
EMA (exponential moving 
average) 257
environments 330
cloud 336–337
environment setup 332 –333
EPS (earnings per share) 33 , 36, 
87
equity, defined 3
ESG (environmental, social, and 
governance) 45 , 194, 325
factors 141
ETFs (exchange-traded 
funds) 4 , 62, 125, 135–137, 
209, 306
Euronext Amsterdam 
(AEB) 132
Evans, Eric 19
EV (Enterprise Value) 312
exchanges
ledgers and 117
orders 289
exits 304 –306
exporting data 337
external assessments 46 –49
ratings 47
target prices 48

INDEX 341
F
face value 114
factors 183
FCF (free cash flow) 26 , 37
features, defined 188
finance chat 206 –208
financial data 53 –54
Finviz platform 55 , 69
float, defined 44
fluctuations 146
FMCW (frequency-modulated 
continuous wave) 85
forex (foreign exchange) 
market 5
founders 311
FRED (Federal Reserve Eco-
nomic Data) 167
FSE (Frankfurt Stock 
Exchange) 132
FullRatio 33
fundamental analysis, 
yfinance 58 –61
fundamental data 53
funding stages 303 –304
funds, types of 5
futures, defined 160
G
GAAP (Generally Accepted 
Accounting Principles) 20
Gemini 182 , 204
GenAI (Generative AI) 11 , 68
machine learning vs. 198–201
practical use of 201–208
GICS (Global Industry Classifica-
tion Standard) 28
Gladwell, Malcolm 328
Graham, Benjamin 275
growth investing 13 , 105
growth portfolios 78
investment thesis 79–84
LiDAR market 85–95
ongoing analysis 97–101
H
hedge funds 5
hedging 15 , 160–165
derivatives 160–163
diversification 163pair trading 163
risk pairing 164
HFT (high-frequency trading)
12, 158, 290, 328
histograms 251 , 263
HMA (Hull moving 
average) 257
Hugging Face 182
I
Ichimoku Cloud 264 –267
IDE (Integrated Development 
Environment) 275 , 334
IFRS (International Financial 
Reporting Standards) 21
income investing 13
income portfolios 105
bonds 112–116
dividends 106–112
early retirement 121
staking 117–120
income statement 22 –25
incubators 300
indenture 113
industry classification 28 –32
influences on GICS sectors
28
sectors and economic 
cycles 30
insider transactions 44
Intelligent Investor, The  
(Graham) 275
Interactive Brokers
extracting data 129
orders 292
interest rate changes 282
investing 19
activist investing 325
analytical investor 1
approaches to 8–14
journey 2
measures of control
326–329
investment advice 323
investment essentials
debt 36
industry classification
28–32
liquidity 34
metrics and ratios 33
ownership 44–45profitability 40
sustainability 45
valuation 37
investment thesis 79 –84
challenging the idea
81–84
starting with an idea 79
your investment thesis 84
iron condor 162
iShares MSCI World ETF 
(URTH) 121
ISIN (International Securities 
Identification 
Number) 138
ITM (in the money) 162
K
K-means clustering 185
KYC (Know Your Customer) 
process 157 , 330
L
labels 188
large-cap 32
leverage 159
liabilities 25
libraries 76
LiDAR (Light Detection and 
Ranging) 82 , 84, 233
LiDAR market
debt 91–92
management 92
picking candidates 86–88
price development 88–91
projected earnings 94–95
technology and 
partnership 92–94
liquidity 26 , 34
LLMs (large language 
models) 68 , 81, 169, 181, 
273, 316, 322, 330, 337
as research assistants
201–203
integrating into code
203–208
logarithmic returns 65
long position 12
lower band 261
LSE (London Stock 
Exchange) 58

INDEX 342
M
M&A (mergers and 
acquisitions) 278
MACD line 262
MACD (Moving Average Conver-
gence Divergence) 262 –
264
margin of safety 158
market capitalization 37
market risk 147
Markowitz-efficient 
portfolio 170 –174
matplotlib library 331
maturation date 113
max_tokens parameter 205
MCPs (model context 
protocols) 222
mean metric 66
mean reversion 247
media 97 , 277
mega-cap 32
merge_fin_data function 132
merge_value_into_df 
function 136
metrics 33
micro-cap 32
mid-cap 32
middle band 260
mining 118
ML (machine learning) 28 , 54, 
181–182, 273
generative AI vs. 198–201
market challenges 192–195
narrowing scope 197
supervised learning
188–192
technical challenges
195–196
unsupervised learning
184–187
moats, economic 108
Monte Carlo simulation 151
movement data 277
moving average ribbons 259
mplfinance library 255
MPT (modern portfolio 
theory) 170
Munger, Charlie 275
mutual funds 5
MVP (minimum viable 
product) 298 –300N
NaN (not a number) values 258
NAV (net asset value) 5 , 136
navPrice ratio 136
negligence 157
news sentiment analysis 100
NLP (natural language 
processing) 198
nomadism 324
nonfinancial data 54 , 274–278
big data 276–278
nonfinancial risks 202
notebooks 57
NYSE (New York Stock 
Exchange) 58
O
one-shot prompting 229 –231
OpenAI 182 , 203
OpenBB 75
operational design domain 93
OpEx (operating expenses) 26
options, types of 6 , 160
orders 289 –294
exchanges vs. brokers 289
executing 292–294
modifiers 291–292
OTM (out of the money) 162
outliers, defined 183
Outliers  (Gladwell) 328
out of the money (OTM) 162
overfitting 195
ownership 44
stock-based compensation 
and dilution 45
P
pair trading 163
pandas library 331
par value 114
passively managed ETFs 4
patterns 247 –249
payment modalities 113
payout ratio 42 , 109
PEG (price/earnings-to-growth) 
ratio 38
P/E (price-to-earnings) ratio
10, 20, 33, 38, 135, 312
pip package manager 331pitching, explained 301 –302
portfolios 13
growth investing 13
income investing 13
value investing 13
PoS (Proof-of-Stake) consensus 
mechanism 119
PoW (Proof-of-Work) consensus 
mechanism 118
premium, defined 6
price-to-book ratio 39
price-to-sales ratio 39
principal, defined 4
Principle: Life and Work  
(Dalio) 328
private equity 6
investing in start-ups 298–306
investment vehicles 306–312
profitability 40
prompt engineering 208 –213
investor profile 208–210
using prompts to find compa-
nies to invest in 211–213
put option 6
PyCharm 335
PyPI (Python Package Index) 71
Python 330 –332
libraries and APIs 331
python_binance API 138
Q
qualitative research 11
quantitative research 10
Quant Rating 47
quarterly_ identifier 59
quick ratio 34
R
R&D (research and develop-
ment)   22
RAG databases 221
RAG (Retrieval-Augmented 
Generation) 217
RAG (retrieval-augmented 
generation) 231 –237
call 234–237
loading data 232
preparing data 234
RAGs (Retrieval-Augmented 
Generations) 212 , 323

INDEX 343
random walk 193
ratings 47
ratios, defined 33
rebalancing 176 –179
Shiller P/E ratio 174
regression 183
REITs (real estate investment 
trusts) 13 , 43, 111
RenTech (Renaissance 
Technologies) 197 , 276
residence of company 109
resilience 159
resistance lines 249
retirement, early 121
ride-hailing services 82
risk-averse investor 208
risk avoidance 157 –159
risk management 143
generating risk profiles 
for individual stocks
150–156
hedging 160–165
human factor 156–160
nonfinancial risk 165–169
portfolio optimization
169–179
ukemi 144–150
risk pairing 164
risk profiles, generating for indi-
vidual stocks 150 –156
correlation 153–156
VaR 150–153
risk rating 113
risks 95 –97
and rewards 15
falling into obsolescence 96
globalization and conflicts
97
squashed by industry 
giants 96
ROA (return on assets) 40
ROE (return on equity) 40
S
SA Analyst Rating 47
SAM (serviceable available 
market) 301
SBC (stock-based 
compensation) 45
scaling start-ups 303 –304
scatterplots 251scheduled event 220
scoring
business model 318
capital intensity and burn 
rate 318
clients and strategic 
partnerships 316
country of origin 317
domain 317
economic moat 318
existing investors 316
founders and advisors 316
incubator and accelerator
316
individual North Star 
Metrics 318
network effect 318
regulation 317
Scrum 157
secrets managers 332 , 337
sector risk 147
Security Analysis  (Graham) 275
selling underperformers 177
shareholder equity 25
Shiller P/E ratio 174
short selling 12 , 159
short-term trading 12
signal line 263
simple returns 65
slippage 288
small-cap 32
SMA (simple moving 
average) 257 , 283
SMEs (small and midsize 
enterprises) 32
SMRs (Small Modular 
Reactors) 164
Snowflake Marketplace 276
SOM (serviceable obtainable 
market) 301
source code repository 333
spreadsheets 126
SPV (Special Purpose 
Vehicle) 310
SREs (site reliability 
engineers) 146
Stage class 234
staking 117 –120
affordable options 119
ledgers and exchanges 117
mining and 118
stalking horse agreement 280start-ups 297 –306
accelerator 302
assessing 312–318
exits 304–306
incubators 300
investment vehicles 306–312
minimum viable product 
(MVP) 298–300
pitching 301
scaling 303–304
validating business 
model 301–302
std (standard deviation) 66 , 153
stock price prediction 190
stocks 3 , 131–135
generating risk profiles for 
individual stocks 150–156
stock screeners 55
stock worksheet 134
stop-loss orders 144
in practice 145
Streamlit 267 –271
strike price 6
successfully failed 304
summarizing documents 201
supervised learning 183 , 
188–192
building analytical 
datasets 188–190
stock price prediction 190
support line 249
sustainability 45 –46
swaps, defined 160
SWFs (Sovereign Wealth 
Funds) 311
swing trading 12
SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, and threats) 
analysis 81 –84
systemic risk 146
T
TAM (total addressable 
market) 301
target prices 48
taxes 145
TDD (test-driven 
development) 144 , 283
technical analysis 150 , 239
yfinance 61–66
technical data 53

INDEX 344
temperature parameter 204 –205
tenbaggers 32
time value of money 22
TMO (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific) 111
trading
algorithmic 12
asset monitors 12
brokers and exchanges 338
trading algorithms 282 –289
backtesting 283–287
complex trading signals 287–
289
transaction costs 145
treemaps 251
trend analysis 98
TWS (Trader Workstation) 129 , 
338
U
UI (user interface) 54
ukemi 144 –150
risk classification 146–148risk measurement 148–150
stop-loss 144
underfitting 195
unsupervised learning
183–187
unsystematic risk 147
upper band 261
URTH (iShares MSCI World 
ETF) 121
user query 220
V
V2X (vehicle-to-everything) 
communication 83
valuation 37 , 312–314
value investing 13 , 105
vanilla bond 113
variance metric 66
VaR (value at risk) 150 –153
var (variance) 153
venture capital 308
VIX (CBOE Volatility 
Index) 277volatility 195
VOO (Vanguard S&P 500 
ETF) 121
VR (virtual reality) 16
VS Code (Visual Studio 
Code) 335
VSE (Vienna Stock 
Exchange) 132
W
Wall Street  (film) 275
Wall Street Rating 47
WMA (weighted moving 
average) 257
Y
yfinance 57 –66
fundamental analysis
58–61
library 56
limitations of 66
technical analysis 61–66

A reference workflow for an AI agent
User
Event
(scheduled/alert)
External data sourcesData IngestOrchestrator
Web SearchRetrieval Generation Review
MailLLM LLM
RAG
DBMCP
Data
ProviderLLM
DocDBMessenger
Output AI agentLLMs
Input
Additional data sources

Stefan Papp
ISBN-13: 978-1-63343-580-3
Aprogrammer has a unique edge when it comes to invest-
ing. Using open-source Python libraries and AI tools, 
you can perform sophisticated analysis normally reserved 
for expensive fi  nancial professionals. Th  is book guides you 
step-by-step through building your own stock analysis tools, forecasting models, and more so you can make smart, data-driven investment decisions. 
Investing for Programmers  shows you how to analyze invest-
ment opportunities using Python and machine learning. In this easy-to-read handbook, experienced algorithmic inves-tor Stefan Papp shows you how to use Pandas, NumPy, and Matplotlib to dissect stock market data, uncover patterns, and build your own trading models. You’ll also discover how to use 
AI agents and LLM s to enhance your fi  nancial research 
and decision-making process. 
What’s Inside
● Build stock analysis tools and predictive models
● Design algorithmic trading strategies
● Use AI to automate investment research
● Analyze market sentiment with media data mining
For professional and hobbyist Python programmers with basic 
personal fi  nance experience.
Stefan Papp  combines 20 years of investment experience in 
stocks, cryptocurrency, and bonds with decades of work as a data engineer, architect, and software consultant.
For print book owners, all digital formats are free:
https:/ /www.manning.com/freebook
Investing for ProgrammersBUSINESS
MANNING“Especially valuable for 
anyone looking to improve 
  their investing.”— Armen Kherlopian
Covenant Venture Capital
 
“A great breadth of topics—
from basic fi  nance concepts to 
cutting-edge technology.”—Ilya Kipnis, Quantstrat T rader
 
“A top tip for people who 
want to leverage development 
skills to improve their 
  investment possibilities.”—Michael Zambiasi
Raiff eisen Digital Bank
 
“Brilliantly bridges
the worlds of coding 
  and fi  nance.”—Th omas Wiecki, PyMC Labs

