# Chapter 1: The analytical investor

Chapter 10Chapters 1+12
Risk management
Hedging
Stress tests
Human factor
Nonﬁnancial risk
Portfolio optimizationChapter 7Big data
(earnings call reports,
transcripts, web data,...)
Financial platforms
(Yahoo Finance,
Finviz,...)Nonﬁnancial data
platforms
MLmodel
LLMSecurities
Data
Platforms
Machine LearningAPI APIAPI
Decision-MakingGenAI

Investing
for Programmers
STEFAN  PAPP
MANNING
SHELTER  ISLAND

For online information and ordering of this and other Manning books, please visit
www.manning.com . The publisher offers discounts on this book when ordered in quantity. 
For more information, please contact
Special Sales Department
Manning Publications Co.
20 Baldwin Road
PO Box 761
Shelter Island, NY 11964
Email: orders@manning.com
©2026 by Manning Publications Co. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in 
any form or by means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, or otherwise, without prior written 
permission of the publisher.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are 
claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in the book, and Manning Publications 
was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial caps or all caps.
Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written, it is Manning’s policy to have 
the books we publish printed on acid-free paper, and we exert our best efforts to that end. 
Recognizing also our responsibility to conserve the resources of our planet, Manning books
are printed on paper that is at least 15 percent recycled and processed without the use of 
elemental chlorine.
The authors and publisher have made every effort to ensure that the information in this book 
was correct at press time. The authors and publisher do not assume and hereby disclaim any 
liability to any party for any loss, damage, or disruption caused by errors or omissions, whether 
such errors or omissions result from negligence, accident, or any other cause, or from any usage 
of the information herein.
Manning Publications Co. Development editor: Connor O’Brien
20 Baldwin Road Technical editor: Anirudha Singh Bhadoriya
PO Box 761 Review editor: Angelina Lazukic ´
Shelter Island, NY 11964 Production editor: Kathy Rossland
Copy editor: Julie McNamee
Proofreader: Jason Everett
Technical proofreader: Ignacio Beltran Torres
Typesetter: Dennis Dalinnik
Cover designer: Marija Tudor
ISBN: 9781633435803
Printed in the United States of America

 To all the entrepreneurs and innovators who dare to make a difference!

 

vbrief contents
1■The analytical investor 1
2■Investment essentials 19
3■Collecting data 52
4■Growth portfolios 78
5■Income portfolios 105
6■Building an asset monitor 123
7■Risk management 143
8■AI for financial research 181
9■AI agents 216
10 ■Charts and technical analysis 239
11 ■Algorithmic trading 273
12 ■Private equity: Investing in start-ups 297
13 ■The road goes ever on and on 321
appendix ■Setting up the environment 330



viicontents
preface xiii
acknowledgments xv
about this book xvii
about the author xx
about the cover illustration xxi
1 The analytical investor 1
1.1 Your investment journey 2
1.2 Assets 2
Stocks 3■Bonds 4■Exchange-traded funds 4
Other funds 5■Foreign exchange market 5■Crypto 5
Derivatives 6■Private equity 6■Other assets 7
Choosing assets 8
1.3 Investment approaches 8
Quantitative research 10■Qualitative research 11
Algorithmic trading and asset monitors 12■Portfolios 
and investing strategies 13
1.4 Risks and rewards 15
1.5 A programmer’s unfair advantage 16
You think in systems and data 16■Your mindset is built for 
the market 16■Define your parameters 17

CONTENTS viii
2 Investment essentials 19
2.1 Accounting in a nutshell 20
Income statement 21■Balance sheet 25■Free cash flow 26
2.2 Industry classification 28
Influences on GICS sectors 28■Sectors and economic cycles 30
2.3 Capitalization 32
2.4 Metrics and ratios 33
Liquidity 34■Debt 36■Earnings 36■Valuation 37
Profitability 40■Dividends 40■Ownership 44
Sustainability 45
2.5 External assessments 46
Ratings 47■Target prices 48
3 Collecting data 52
3.1 Financial data 53
3.2 Financial analysis platforms 54
3.3 Data science notebooks 57
3.4 yfinance 57
Fundamental analysis 58■Technical analysis 61
Limitations of yfinance 66
3.5 Commercial libraries 67
Finviz 69■EODHD 71■Alpha Vantage 73
OpenBB 75
3.6 Other libraries 76
4 Growth portfolios 78
4.1 Investment thesis 79
Starting with an idea 79■Challenging the idea 81
Your investment thesis 84
4.2 LiDAR market 85
Picking candidates 86■Price development 88■Debt 91
Management 92■Technology and partnership 92
Projected earnings 94
4.3 Risks 95
Falling into obsolescence 96■Squashed by industry giants 96
Globalization and conflicts 97

CONTENTS ix
4.4 Ongoing analysis 97
Media 97■Trend analysis 98■News sentiment 
analysis 100■Measuring success 101
4.5 What is next 101
5 Income portfolios 105
5.1 Dividends 106
5.2 Bonds 112
5.3 Crypto staking 117
Ledgers and exchanges 117■Mining and staking 118
Affordable staking options 119
5.4 Early retirement 120
6 Building an asset monitor 123
6.1 Architecture 124
6.2 The spreadsheet 126
6.3 Extracting data 127
Alpaca: A developer-first broker 128■Interactive Brokers: 
A legacy powerhouse with a modern twist 129
6.4 Enriching data 130
6.5 Processing assets 131
Stocks 131■Exchange-traded funds 135■Bonds 137
Cryptocurrencies 138
6.6 Outlook 141
7 Risk management 143
7.1 Ukemi 144
Stop-loss 144■Risk classification 146■Risk 
measurement 148
7.2 Generating risk profiles for individual stocks 150
Value at risk (VaR) 150■Correlation 153
7.3 The human factor 156
Negligence 157■Risk avoidance 157■Resilience 159
7.4 Hedging 160
Derivatives 160■Diversification 163■Pair trading 163
Risk pairing 164

CONTENTS x
7.5 Nonfinancial risk 165
Markets 166■Economic data 166■Assessing nonfinancial 
risk 168
7.6 Portfolio optimization 169
Markowitz-efficient portfolio 169■Shiller P/E ratio 174
Rebalancing 176
8 AI for financial research 181
8.1 From code to machine learning 182
Unsupervised learning example 184■Supervised learning 
example 187■Market challenges 192■Technical 
challenges 195■Narrowing the scope 197
8.2 From machine learning to generative AI 198
Comparing LLMs 199■Complementing ML with 
GenAI 200■Challenges 200■Final judgement 
on ML and GenAI 200
8.3 Practical use of GenAI 201
Using LLMs as research assistants 201■Integrating LLMs 
into code 203
8.4 Prompt engineering 208
An investor’s profile 208■Using prompts to find companies 
to invest in 211
9 AI agents 216
9.1 Requirements 217
Successful communication 217■Agentic design patterns 218
9.2 Agentic workflows without frameworks 222
Prompt repository 222■Export results 224
9.3 Framework for AI agents 228
From one-shot prompting to agents 229■Retrieval-augmented 
generation 231
10 Charts and technical analysis 239
10.1 Charts 240
Reading charts 246■Patterns 247■Interpreting a 
chart 249■Alternative chart types 250

CONTENTS xi
10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes 253
Candlesticks 254■Charts based on averages 257
Ichimoku Cloud 264
10.3 Visualization with Streamlit 267
11 Algorithmic trading 273
11.1 Nonfinancial data 274
Big data by example 276
11.2 Catalysts 278
Mergers and acquisitions 278■Companies in distress 279
Earnings calls 280■Disasters 281■Interest rate 
changes 282
11.3 Trading algorithms 282
Backtesting 283■Complex trading signals 287
11.4 Orders 289
Exchanges vs. brokers 289■Order modifiers 291
Executing orders 292
12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups 297
12.1 From idea to initial public offering 298
The first minimum viable product (pre-seed) 298■Validating 
the business model (seed) 301■Scaling a start-up: The shift 
to institutional investment 303■Exits: The final 
transition 304
12.2 Investment vehicles 306
Venture capital 308■Angel networks 309■Sovereign 
wealth funds 311
12.3 Assessing start-ups 312
Valuation 312■Dilution 314■Scoring 316
13 The road goes ever on and on 321
13.1 Getting advice 322
13.2 Stay curious 323
13.3 Alpha hunter 323
13.4 Nomadism 324
13.5 Activist investing 325

CONTENTS xii
13.6 Measures of control 326
Checks and balances 326■Gain distance 327■Programmer’s 
journey 327■Playing it safe 328
appendix Setting up the environment 330
index 339

xiiipreface
Imagine this: a 50-year-old is approached by a genie with an intriguing offer. They can
receive staggering wealth to never work again or be rejuvenated to age 20. The allure
of reliving life with youth and wisdom is strong. But from a purely financial stand-
point, which is the wiser choice?
 I grew up believing everyone must work until their mid-60s to retire. Stopping
work at 50 seemed like pure luck. Over time, investing became my passion. I’ve
learned that starting early and making informed investment decisions can make finan-
cial independence by 50 achievable, especially if you know how to code. Programming
sharpens the skills needed for better investment choices.
 I’ve always believed that work should serve a higher purpose, but meaningful
work is often not the highest-paid. I wrote the book I wish I had at 20—to acceler-
ate my path to financial freedom and independence from a paycheck. After read-
ing it, all you’ll need is to find a genie who could send you back to age 20—armed
with the knowledge to retire early. But even without the genie, what you learn here
can transform how you invest, helping you move toward financial freedom with pur-
pose and precision.
 I also want to convince you that investing can be fun. I love using programming to
analyze companies and form data-backed investment theses. There’s nothing quite
like seeing a company you believed in multiply in value fivefold or more.
 Of course, no path to wealth is guaranteed. You can pick the wrong horse. Picture
the late 1990s: a friend tells you about a failing tech company whose ousted founder
just returned and about a thriving American energy company riding the wave of

PREFACE xiv
deregulation. If you chose the second, you picked Enron over Apple, and lost your
investment. Diversification helps mitigate such risks, but the larger lesson is this:
hubris and impatience are dangerous. Mindset matters most.
 In the early 2010s, I pivoted to big data. It wasn’t just about using more data but
transforming entire businesses. I noticed some companies outsmarted others. If I
invested in the smarter ones, I could ride their success. It was a natural progression:
from using data to understand customer behavior to using data to predict which com-
panies would thrive.
 Through this journey, I’ve found four key traits for investment success: critical
thinking, patience, dedication, and curiosity. Programmers excel at these, and I
believe they can shine as investors.
 Happy reading and coding! I wish you sharp insights and smarter investing.

xvacknowledgments
I want to thank the following individuals, in chronological order, for their invaluable
contributions to this book.
 When I first approached acquisition editor Jonathan Gennick with a proposal for a
book that didn’t fit the typical mold at Manning, I knew approval wouldn’t come eas-
ily. However, Jonathan believed in the project, and I’m convinced this book would
have been impossible without his advocacy.
 I am also profoundly grateful to Connor O’Brien, an exceptional development edi-
tor. His unwavering support and insightful feedback were instrumental in shaping the
quality of this work.
 Technical editor Anirudha Bhadoriya provided an excellent review of the manu-
script. His thoughtful questions and genuine engagement added valuable perspec-
tives to the book. Anirudha is a staff software engineer specializing in distributed
systems at Snowflake. He has been actively investing his own money in the equity mar-
kets for more than 20 years, combining deep technical expertise with personal finan-
cial acumen.
 Many thanks to Julie McNamee for copy editing and Azra Dedic for the support
with the visualizations. Their input significantly improved the fine details of this book
 To all the reviewers—Amarjit Bhandal, Arun Kumar Rajamandrapu, Bin Li,
Charles Lam, Chris Heneghan, Gary Bake, Ian Long, James Carella, Jeremy Chen,
Juan Pablo Duque, Kevin Orr, Koushik Sundar, Marco Seguri, Nikhil Kassetty, Oscar
Cao, Patrick Grütter, Pierre Boutquin, Piti Champeethong, Prateek Punj, Raghuram
Katakam, Sahithi Donkina, Saketh Patibandla, Sneha Thangaraja, Sofiia Shvets,

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS xvi
Thomas Heiman, Vijay Pahuja, Vinicios Wentz, and William Dealtry—your sugges-
tions helped make this a better book.
 I want to thank all contributors through the Manning liveBook who provided feed-
back on the book. I incorporated every piece of advice I received up to the production
release, and I’ll also look at comments after the production release for new editions.
 Finally, a special thanks to Warren Buffett. Though he does not know me, he has
served as an enduring role model for the kind of investor I strive to become.

xviiabout this book
Investing for Programmers  introduces tools and techniques for analyzing investment
opportunities using Python and modern analytical methods. This book does not offer
financial advice but shows you how to explore financial assets and make more
informed investment decisions.
 After reading this book, you’ll be able to analyze financial assets with Python, build
AI agents, and use LLMs to gain deeper insights into your investment options. Keep in
mind that there are no guaranteed paths to wealth. This book may help you improve
your odds of long-term financial success and increase your skills to gain insights for
better decision-making. Be skeptical of anyone claiming risk-free riches.
Who should read this book
You should have basic programming skills. However, if you have only minimal experi-
ence, you can still benefit from using large language models (LLMs) to help set up
the environment and fill in any gaps in your Python knowledge.
How this book is organized: A road map
This book has 13 chapters. The book begins by teaching the basics, including inter-
preting financial ratios and collecting data. As you progress, the topics become
increasingly complex. You can always jump to later chapters if you’re experienced
with the basics.
Chapter 1 introduces you to the investment domain and how programmers can
excel.

ABOUT THIS BOOK xviii
Chapter 2 teaches financial basics and introduces you to key metrics for
exploration.
Chapter 3 demonstrates collecting financial data using Python libraries, includ-
ing Yahoo Finance and alternative libraries.
Chapter 4 teaches you how to create an investment thesis to look for growth
portfolios.
Chapter 5 explains how to look for portfolios to create passive income.
Chapter 6 demonstrates how to collect data from brokers and exchanges, cen-
tralize all holdings in one place, and facilitate their analysis.
Chapter 7 explains how to investigate risks and learn ways to hedge them. We
look at Sharpe ratios and other methods.
Chapter 8 introduces AI for investment analysis. We introduce machine learning
use cases and explore the application of generative AI in investment research.
Chapter 9 demonstrates how to use AI agents for more advanced use cases,
enabling data exploration and the integration of additional data sources.
Chapter 10 shows how to display charts and technical analysis. You learn how to
create charts using Bollinger Bands and other frameworks.
Chapter 11 explores algorithmic trading and the application of nonfinancial
data in financial analysis.
Chapter 12 explores private equity as a form of ownership in startups and how
to make informed investment decisions.
Chapter 13 summarizes what you learned and provides some final thoughts for
the path ahead.
About the code
This book heavily uses source code, primarily in numbered listings throughout the
chapters. The source code is formatted in a fixed-width  font  like  this  to distin-
guish it from ordinary text. Sometimes, code is also bold to highlight changes from
previous steps in the chapter, such as when a new feature is added to an existing line
of code. 
 In many cases, the source code has been reformatted, with line breaks and reworked
indentation added to accommodate the available page space in the book. Additionally,
comments in the source code have often been removed from the listing when the
code is described in the text. Code annotations accompany many of the listings, high-
lighting important concepts.
 You can get executable code snippets from this book’s liveBook (online) version at
https:/ /livebook.manning.com/book/investing-for-programmers . The source code
for the examples in this book is available for download on the publisher’s website at
www.manning.com/books/investing-for-programmers . The code is also available on
GitHub at https:/ /github.com/StefanPapp/investing-for-programmers .

ABOUT THIS BOOK xix
liveBook discussion forum
Purchase of Investing for Programmers  includes free access to liveBook, Manning’s online
reading platform. Using liveBook’s exclusive discussion features, you can attach global
comments to the book or specific sections or paragraphs. It’s a snap to make notes for
yourself, ask and answer technical questions, and receive help from the author and
other users. To access the forum, go to https:/ /livebook.manning.com/book/investing
-for-programmers/discussion . 
 Manning’s commitment to our readers is to provide a venue for meaningful dia-
logue between individual readers and between readers and the author. It isn’t a com-
mitment to a specific amount of participation by the author, whose contributions to
the forum remain voluntary and unpaid. We suggest you ask the author some chal-
lenging questions lest his interest stray! The forum and archives of previous discus-
sions will be accessible on the publisher’s website as long as the book remains in print.

xxabout the author
STEFAN  PAPP is a trailblazer at the intersection of AI and invest-
ment strategy. With a career that spans decades as a data engi-
neer, architect, and consultant for top-tier clients, Stefan has
mastered the art of using data to solve complex problems. His
thought leadership is reflected in his published technical books
and his role as a university educator, where he inspires the next
generation of tech innovators.
    As a seasoned investor with more than 20 years of experience
in stocks, cryptocurrency, and bonds, Stefan brings a data-
driven approach to portfolio optimization that few can repli-
cate. By combining cutting-edge AI techniques, including generative AI, with deep
market insights, he has consistently outperformed traditional investment strategies.
 In this book, Stefan demystifies the application of programming skills to financial
analysis, sharing practical tools and real-world examples from his journey. Readers will
learn how to harness data, adapt evolving best practices, and use AI to uncover oppor-
tunities, optimize research, and gain a decisive edge in the market.


xxiabout the cover illustration
The figure on the cover of Investing for Programmers , titled “Arméniennes à Erzeroum,”
or “Armenian Girls from Erzurum,” is taken from The Nations. Album of Costumes From
All Countries  by Alexandre Lacauchie, published in 1847. Each illustration is finely
drawn and colored by hand.
 In those days, it was easy to identify where people lived and what their trade or sta-
tion in life was just by their dress. Manning celebrates the inventiveness and initiative
of the computer business with book covers based on the rich diversity of regional cul-
ture centuries ago, brought back to life by pictures from collections such as this one.

 

1The analytical investor
A tough work environment often marks the beginning of the journey to financial
independence. Formal education rarely prepares people for the sometimes harsh
realities of the workplace: the micromanaging boss, a difficult coworker, a cutthroat
culture, or the client who secretly rewrites your code and blames you if things go
wrong. At some point, many programmers dream of escaping—maybe as a sheep
herder in a remote forest or the captain of a starship in galaxies far, far away.
 Finding a new job often proves to be a temporary fix. Starting your own com-
pany usually means trading a 40-hour week for an 80-hour one, with less pay and
only a slim chance of long-term success. If the start-up fails, you can land right back
where you started, only to find that the toxic former colleague who had teased you
got promoted and is now your boss.
 But what if the solution isn’t another job, but greater independence from any job
through gradually building passive income? The timeline to financial freedom variesThis chapter covers
An overview of securities and the market
Investment strategies for managing risk and 
maximizing gains
Tools and techniques for the data-driven investor
Programmers’ traits that can be an advantage

2 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
depending on your circumstances—a family, a mortgage, or even just residing with
Her Majesty, the cat—creating a different scenario for everyone. Freedom can begin
with the first realization that some of your essential expenses are covered by passive
income . . . forever. And if you keep going, the number of things you don’t have to
work for to pay for increases. Knowing that you can leave a high-paying, soul-crushing
job for a more fulfilling one, even if it pays less, is a powerful relief for a developer
who has endured hell on earth.
 This book serves as a step-by-step guide to achieving greater independence. It
emphasizes rational thinking and patience; no miracles are guaranteed. Be wary of
anyone claiming you can get rich in 24 hours. Following such advice often depends on
luck, a good lawyer, or both.
1.1 Your investment journey
Diving into the financial world can feel like stepping onto the road, and if you don’t
keep your feet, there’s no knowing where you might be swept off to. To avoid stray-
ing off the beaten track, we need to understand the essentials of what we want to
explore.
 Sooner or later, financial planning becomes a necessity. Perhaps we saw our dream
house, met the person we want to start a family with, heard the demands for more
comfort from Her Majesty the cat, or wanted to achieve financial independence. Every
journey begins the same way. You assess what you already have and explore and opti-
mize your expenses to determine how much surplus money you can accumulate on
average each month.
 With your carefully estimated monthly surplus, friends might approach you with
ideas on how to invest it. Some of your “expert advisors” may try to charm you with
stocks and their alleged high returns . The conservative camp prefers bonds instead,
reasoning that they offer lower risk. A third group of finance aficionados may suggest
that you put everything into an index fund and refrain from thinking about your
investments until you need the money.
 Risk and return are the pillars of any investment strategy. However, simply estimat-
ing potential outcomes under normal market conditions isn’t enough. Without a fun-
damental understanding of what you’re investing in, it’s unwise to risk your capital
based on a casual tip from a friend.
 This book aims to guide you toward becoming a data-driven investor. You’ll learn
both the basics of investing and, in parallel, how to make smarter decisions based on
data, research, rational thinking, and analysis. 
1.2 Assets
To get started with investing, we must understand the basics of assets. In its simplest
form, an asset is something we can purchase to monetize. We use the term securities  to
refer to a group of assets in the financial domain, such as stocks and bonds. In gen-
eral, assets are monetized in two ways:

3 1.2 Assets
Capital appreciation —For example, buy low and sell high.
Passive income —For example, getting regular payments (interest payments on
savings accounts or receiving rent from a tenant).
Investors should begin by understanding their risk tolerance—the amount of poten-
tial loss they can handle without stress—and their financial goals, which outline how
much they hope to earn within a specific time frame. A third critical factor, often over-
looked in books for professional investors but vital for individuals, is the time required
to manage an investment strategy. If monitoring your portfolio consumes time you’d
rather spend on other activities, it’s a clear signal that you need to rethink your
approach. The more aware you are of your risk appetite, desired returns, and maxi-
mum time commitment, the better prepared you are to develop an investment strat-
egy that helps you meet your life goals.
1.2.1 Stocks
Stock represents ownership, also known as equity . When you buy stocks, you acquire a
small part of a company. As of June 2025, Apple has 15,509,763,000 shares outstanding.
Purchasing one share  of Apple means you own 0.000000006447552% of the company.
 Supply and demand affect stock prices. Investors typically buy more shares of suc-
cessful companies, which causes their share prices to rise. However, a stock’s value
depends on more than just its company’s performance. The entire market is also sig-
nificantly influenced by larger factors, including global politics and economic news.
Some stocks offer income to investors through a small payment per share, known as a
dividend . As of June 2025, Apple trades at about $213.55 per share, and the company
pays a quarterly dividend of roughly $0.26 per share. These payments result in a divi-
dend yield of approximately 0.49%, representing the return before taxes that an
investor gains from dividends relative to the share’s price.
 To put this into perspective, we can compare a company’s dividend yield to the
yield on a 10-year US Treasury bond, which is often used as a benchmark for a “risk-
free” return. As of June 2025, these bonds offer a yield of around 4.3%—considerably
higher than Apple’s current dividend payout.
 Considering the treasury yield, investing in Apple solely for its dividend income is a
poor choice. Because inflation usually exceeds its ~0.5% yield, an investor would lose
buying power if they don’t account for potential capital gains from the stock’s growth.Terminology
Through a brokerage account, investors buy shares  (referring to a countable amount)
of the company’s stock  (representing the total assets of a company. A portfolio  is a
collection of securities  (stocks, bonds, options, etc.) that you own. If a position in your
portfolio is higher than its purchase price, you have an unrealized gain until you sell
it to realize the gain. The same logic applies to unrealized and realized losses.

4 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
 If you’re passionate about identifying companies that can outperform the market,
chapter 4 provides all the details you need to build an investment thesis and develop a
growth portfolio in a structured way.
1.2.2 Bonds
A bond is an IOU. When you buy a bond, you lend money (the principal ) to an entity,
such as a government or a company. In return, you receive periodic interest payments,
known as coupons . With few exceptions, bonds have a maturity date—a specific date in
the future when the issuer repays your original principal in full.
 All bonds are equal, but some are more equal than others. Because many issuers
exist, each bond has a different level of risk:
Credit risk —Some issuers are more likely to default on their debt obligations. To
help investors evaluate this risk for other issuers, credit rating agencies such as
Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s (S&P’s) provide independent assessments.
Yield —Typically, the more risk you accept, the greater your potential return
or yield.
When holding a bond, you can either wait until maturity to receive its full face value
or sell it on the open market earlier. Choosing to sell before maturity means the price
you receive will be determined by the market, which could result in a gain or a loss on
your initial investment.
NOTE The basic assumption behind considering US government bonds risk-
free is the belief that the US government will always honor its debt obligations
and won’t default. This convention has become standard practice in finance.
However, describing such assets as extremely low risk would be more accurate
because, theoretically, even the US government could default.
Chapter 5 discusses how to build dependable passive income, offering a way to cover
everyday expenses and boost your financial independence. It emphasizes practical
methods, including a detailed comparison of bonds and dividend stocks as primary
sources of income.
1.2.3 Exchange-traded funds
Savvy investors diversify their risk by not putting all their eggs in one basket. Investment
companies help with this by bundling multiple securities into a single fund. Exchange-
traded funds (ETFs) are a popular type of investment that trades on an exchange, mak-
ing them easily accessible for purchase and sale through any online broker.
 Buying an ETF is a simple way to diversify your investments. Instead of analyzing
and purchasing hundreds of individual stocks, you can hold a small stake in carefully
chosen assets with just one transaction. Most ETFs are passively managed , meaning they
track a market index automatically, such as the S&P 500. Algorithms are used to rebal-
ance the fund’s holdings, keeping it aligned with its index. In actively managed  ETFs, a
portfolio manager selects specific investments to buy.

5 1.2 Assets
 ETFs aren’t free, and ETF issuers charge a small annual management fee (expense
ratio). Still, they are highly cost-effective. For an individual, buying all the underlying
stocks directly in separate transactions would cost more due to transaction fees.
Because ETFs are collections of assets, all sections that discuss the underlying assets
also include ETFs.
1.2.4 Other funds
Other common pooled funds are mutual funds and hedge funds. These funds are
described here:
Mutual funds —These funds are similar to ETFs in that they provide diversifica-
tion and are highly regulated. The primary operational difference is that mutual
funds only trade once a day at a price determined after the market closes, known
as the net asset value (NAV).
Hedge funds —These funds are typically less regulated, require a substantial min-
imum investment, and are generally accessible only to wealthy investors.
While ETFs and mutual funds target retail investors, hedge funds operate at a differ-
ent level. They use more aggressive and complex strategies and are only available to
accredited investors , which include high-net-worth individuals and institutions that meet
specific wealth requirements.
 Other funds are outside the scope of this book; however, we explore hedging tech-
niques used by professional hedge funds in chapter 7. Investors can use these tech-
niques to optimize their portfolios.
1.2.5 Foreign exchange market
Beyond owning equity or lending money, investors can also speculate on currency
exchange rates in the foreign exchange  (forex) market . Every country has its currency,
and the value of these currencies fluctuates against each other in pairs (e.g., the
EUR/USD). For example, one day, the euro might strengthen against the US dollar,
and the next day it might weaken. Forex traders analyze economic indicators and mar-
ket trends to predict these movements, aiming to make a profit by buying a currency
before it appreciates or selling it before it depreciates.
 Currency risk is discussed in chapter 7. Additionally, all aspects of technical analy-
sis, as outlined in chapter 10, apply to all assets, including forex.
1.2.6 Crypto
For many, cryptocurrency is a complex asset class that can be hard to understand. To
clarify, it’s essential first to separate the underlying technology from its most well-
known application:
Blockchain —This is the core technology. Think of it as a secure, decentralized
digital ledger—a growing list of records (blocks) linked and protected by

6 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
cryptography. Although it’s best known for digital currency, blockchain tech-
nology has uses in many other areas.
Cryptocurrency —This refers to a digital asset built on blockchain technology.
The primary value of cryptocurrency lies in its ability to facilitate peer-to-peer transac-
tions without requiring a trusted third party. Unlike traditional financial systems,
which rely on intermediaries such as banks, cryptocurrency networks enable direct
transfers between individuals.
 The technology that secures these networks also presents unique investment oppor-
tunities. Chapter 5 explores one such method— staking —which allows you to earn
rewards by helping validate transactions. It also offers a vital overview of the common
risks and criticisms associated with this volatile asset class.
1.2.7 Derivatives
Think of a derivative as a contract whose value is derived  f r o m  a n  u n d e r l y i n g  a s s e t ,
such as a stock or a commodity. It establishes rules for future transactions, helping you
manage risk or speculate on price movements.
 For most investors, options are the most useful derivatives. An  option  grants you the
right, but not the obligation , to buy or sell an asset at a set price before a certain expira-
tion date.
 Think of it this way: you pay a small fee (the premium ) to get an API key. This key
grants you access to a function—either buy()  or sell() —that you can execute under
specific conditions. If the conditions aren’t met, you let the key expire. Your only loss
is the premium you paid.
A put option  gives the buyer the right, but not the obligation, to sell an asset at a
set price (the strike price ). It’s a type of insurance.
A call option  gives the buyer the right, but not the obligation, to buy an asset at a
specified strike price. It’s a way to bet on a price increase with limited risk.
You can also be on the other side of the transaction and sell (or, as it’s also called,
write) options. You receive the premium as income, but you assume an obligation .
 Selling a put option means you’re obligated to buy the stock at the strike price if
the buyer chooses to exercise it. If the stock drops to zero, you’re still required to buy
it at the high strike price, which could lead to a potentially disastrous outcome.
 Options are powerful tools, but they’re complex instruments with significant risk.
That’s why they are covered in chapter 7, which focuses on risk.
1.2.8 Private equity
After purchasing shares on an exchange, you become a shareholder of a publicly
traded company. One advantage of being publicly traded is that it makes buying shares
easy. Investors worldwide can become shareholders within seconds if they are logged
in to their brokerage account and decide to buy shares.

7 1.2 Assets
 Start-ups present the most significant profit potential. They are ideal for investors
willing to accept more risk in exchange for the opportunity to achieve wealth more
quickly. Because private companies aren’t traded on public stock exchanges, you need
to take a different approach:
Direct investment —You can invest directly in companies. Start-ups that seek single
private investors are usually in their earliest stages, typically pre-seed or seed stage.
Angel or venture capital investments —These involve funds created to invest in start-
ups. As a private investor, you can become a limited partner in such a fund. If
the start-up achieves a successful exit, you can expect high multiple returns on
your investment.
Chapter 12 examines opportunities to invest in private equity and highlights the main
differences between this type of investment and investing in stocks.
1.2.9 Other assets
Investing involves acquiring assets and monetizing them, either through capital gains
or passive income . We might not always recognize every asset as such. For example, a
patent can be valued and licensed for royalties, but not everyone considers it part of
their assets.
 Commodities are raw materials, such as gold, oil, and wheat, that investors can
trade. Because their value is linked to real-world supply and demand, their prices
often move independently of the stock and bond markets. While investors can gain
exposure through futures contracts or ETFs, they should be aware that these markets
can be very volatile. This volatility is caused by a variety of complex factors, including
geopolitical events, weather conditions, and global economic growth.
 Some investors view real estate as a safe investment, but it comes with challenges.
For one, it’s a highly illiquid asset, meaning that selling a property can be a slow and
tedious process. Additionally, landlords face the risk of difficult tenants who might
damage the property or fail to pay rent.
 An asset is considered non-fungible if it’s unique and can’t be easily replaced by
another identical item. In contrast, fungible assets are interchangeable, which makes
them a good starting point for new investors. This interchangeability allows them to
be traded easily and efficiently. While you can still make a good living from non-fungi-
ble assets, investing in securities simplifies your life for several reasons:
Lower capital requirements —You can buy shares for just a few dollars, whereas
non-fungible assets such as real estate or art may cost millions.
Lower maintenance —Physical objects require secure storage, insurance, and pres-
ervation, resulting in significant overhead and maintenance costs. Securities
don’t have these drawbacks.
Liquidity —Shares can be sold at any time, while owners of non-fungible items
must find a buyer. Converting them into cash at a fair price can take months or
even years.

8 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
Scalability —Investors who find a well-performing company can keep purchasing
shares, whereas investors of non-fungible assets can’t buy assets twice.
For these reasons, this book concentrates on securities and other assets not included
here.
1.2.10 Choosing assets
Before you begin exploring which assets to purchase, consider these four questions
about your investment goals, and answer them as honestly as possible:
How much money do I need to live a happy life?
How much money do I have that I don’t need right now and can use for
investments?
How much risk am I willing to take for possible bigger gains?
How much time am I willing to dedicate to the investment process itself, such as
researching potential investments and monitoring my portfolios?
Besides some universal principles of investing, such as investing only in businesses you
understand, there is no one-size-fits-all strategy. Still, every investor can find an approach
that best suits their expectations and goals. Now that we know the asset types, we can
explore further and examine investment strategies that align with our needs.
1.3 Investment approaches
Having covered the fundamentals of financial assets, we’ll now focus on how to cre-
ate value from them. We can classify methods of monetizing assets into three main
categories:
Gambling —A surprising number of people rely on gut feelings or perceived signs
from the universe when deciding to buy or sell. Even experienced investors can
fall victim to cognitive biases, such as noticing patterns in random events and
believing “no coincidence” has led them to a life-changing investment.
Investing —We’ll avoid gambling-like speculation to focus on more structured
ways to build wealth. Disciplined investing views building wealth as a long-term
goal. It depends on careful analysis and critical thinking, aiming to reduce
impulsive decisions.
Trading —While investing focuses on long-term success, trading centers on capi-
talizing on short-term price fluctuations. Due to its higher frequency and
shorter time horizons, trading carries more risk than long-term investing.
Let’s explore some strategies that can help us become better traders or investors and,
in turn, help us avoid gambling. Figure 1.1 illustrates the entire investment process
and highlights all chapters where relevant topics are discussed in detail.
 We use financial platforms and publicly available information to collect data on
securities. We can generate more insights about the securities using various analytical

9 1.3 Investment approaches
methods, including machine learning and AI. We can then apply these new insights to
our decision-making processes.Nonﬁnancial dataEquity
Crypto
AI Agent
Asset monitorInference
ChartsShares PrivateDebt
Bonds
Derivatives
RAG DBForex CryptoCurrency
ApplicationFunds (ETF, Mutual, Hedge, Venture)
As a collection of assets
Financial data
Fundamentals Technical Sentiments ESG ratings
Algorithmic tradingStrategy / investment
thesisModel context
protocol
(MCP)
Income portfolio
Value portfolio
Growth portfolioBuy
Sell
HoldNet worth
Proﬁt/lossMoving averages
Bollinger Bands
Ichimoku loud CChapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapters 4+5 Chapter 11 Chapter 6Chapter 8 Chapter 9
Chapter 10Chapters 1+12
Risk management
Hedging
Stress tests
Human factor
Nonﬁnancial risk
Portfolio optimizationChapter 7Big data
(earnings call reports,
transcripts, web data,...)
Financial platforms
(Yahoo Finance,
Finviz,...)Nonﬁnancial data
platforms
ML model
LLMSecurities
Data
Platforms
Machine LearningAPI APIAPI
Decision-MakingGenAI
Figure 1.1 A survey of the tools and techniques covered in this book, including pointers to the chapters that 
focus on the relevant domains

10 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
1.3.1 Quantitative research
Quantitative  refers to numbers, counts, and averages that provide information about
what is happening. The goal is to gather as much financial data as possible across many
companies and compare these “factors” that may influence the future development of
share prices. You can analyze a company’s performance from multiple angles. Histori-
cal data shows how performance has changed over time. You can compare the current
performance of numerous companies.
 Thanks to accounting standards, financial data is highly standardized. As we’ll see
in this book, nonfinancial data can also be quantifiable and incorporated into invest-
ment research.
 In chapter 2, we highlight the financial data that could be especially relevant for
quantitative analysis, such as revenues, profit margins, and price-to-earnings (P/E)
ratios. Quantitative research begins with data collection and aggregation.
 In chapter 3, we show how to gather data relevant to investment analysis. We can
use Python libraries designed to provide financial data in a structured format. Alterna-
tively, we can also scrape data from websites.
 Having quantitative data allows us to use a machine learning algorithm to forecast
future price movements based on historical data. Chapter 8 offers a detailed overview
of how machine learning models are generated.
 Technical analysis involves assessing assets by examining statistical trends from
trading activity, such as price changes and volume. Technical analysts use historical
price charts and various indicators to identify patterns and forecast potential future
price movements. For example, figure 1.2 shows a price chart for NVIDIA, which a
technical analyst would analyze to make informed trading decisions.
NVDA
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0Price
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
DateClosing Price
Figure 1.2 The price development of NVIDIA from 2016 to 2025. Notice the sharp rise in recent years; this is a 
typical example of the growth that attracts many traders and investors. Keep in mind that such growth rates are rare.

11 1.3 Investment approaches
While a line chart of share price development is one of the easier charts to create, we
also have charts that calculate indicators to help with deciding when to buy or sell. In
figure 1.3, we present a candlestick chart for NVIDIA for July 2025, which we created
using the code introduced in chapter 10.
1.3.2 Qualitative research
Qualitative  data includes user feedback from a bug report—the context, feelings, and
reasons that explain why the issue is happening. The financial aspects involve the
strength of that company’s brand, the quality of its management, and the risk of a new
competitor disrupting its market.
 Some of the qualitative data can also be converted into quantitative data. Think of
scraping data from earnings reports, conducting sentiment analysis on the transcripts,
and comparing the scores of all earnings calls. A key part of analyzing qualitative data
is the use of GenAI and AI agents, as summarized here:
Generative AI (GenAI) —This is a newer type of AI that can produce new content
and insights. In finance, GenAI is used to summarize large datasets (e.g., earn-
ings reports and news articles), analyze market sentiment from social media,
and even simulate market scenarios to stress-test investment strategies. We dis-
cuss GenAI in chapter 8.
AI agents —These are advanced AI systems designed to perform complex, mul-
tistep tasks independently. An AI agent can be tasked with conducting thor-
ough research on an asset by collecting data from the web, analyzing financial
statements, assessing recent news, and generating a comprehensive report.
This process automates the entire analytical workflow. We dedicate chapter 9
to AI agents.
Figure 1.3 Candlestick 
charts help us evaluate stock 
performance over multiple days. 
Black (or red) shows that a 
stock’s price decreased, while 
white (or green) shows that it 
increased during the day.

12 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
To illustrate these concepts, chapter 4 will examine companies in the autonomous
driving field as a case study for growth investing, while chapter 5 will focus on income
investment strategies. Both chapters will highlight opportunities for programmers to
gather data about various opportunities more efficiently and to develop better meth-
ods for creating scorecards for investability.
1.3.3 Algorithmic trading and asset monitors
While an investor focuses on a company’s long-term health and intrinsic value, a
trader mainly cares about an asset’s price movement and market conditions. This
focus enables traders to employ strategies that are uncommon in traditional invest-
ment portfolios. We can divide trading approaches into two main categories:
Going long (long position) —This is a common strategy that involves buying an
asset with the expectation that its price will rise. This method follows the tradi-
tional “buy low, sell high” principle.
Going short (short selling) —This strategy aims to profit from a decline in an asset’s
price. A trader borrows an asset (e.g., shares of stock), sells it on the open mar-
ket at the current price, and plans to repurchase it later at a lower cost.
With this understanding, let’s examine several key categories of trading. These styles
are characterized by their time frames, methods, and dependence on technology:
Short-term trading —This is a broad category of trading that involves buying and
selling assets over a short period, from minutes to weeks. A trader typically exe-
cutes these trades manually, based on a predetermined strategy. The specific
time frame often determines the name of the trading style:
–Day trading —This style involves opening and closing all trading positions
within the same trading day. A day trader seeks to profit from intraday price
movements and avoids holding any positions overnight.
–Swing trading —This strategy involves holding positions for more than a day
but usually no longer than a few weeks. A swing trader aims to capture larger
price swings or short-term trends that develop over several days.
Automated trading (algorithmic trading) —Traders use algorithms to execute buy
and sell orders based on predefined indicators such as price changes or trading
volatility. Automation enforces disciplined execution of a strategy, removing
emotion from the decision-making process. For example, a day trader could
automate their specific plan. Chapter 11 explains how to identify potential alpha
factors.
High-frequency trading (HFT) —This is an advanced form of automated trading
that operates at breakneck speeds with large volumes of orders. HFT firms use
powerful computers and sophisticated algorithms to capitalize on minute, fleet-
ing price differences or arbitrage opportunities, frequently executing trades in
microseconds. Being faster than competitors is the primary focus of HFT, a field
led by specialized quantitative firms.

13 1.3 Investment approaches
Effective asset management starts with a unified view of all holdings. Chapter 6 lays
the groundwork for this by showing how to gather data from multiple brokers and
exchanges into a single Google Sheet. We’ll use Python to connect to two global bro-
kers, Interactive Brokers and Alpaca. If you aren’t comfortable connecting directly to
brokers, you can use database tables to store their holdings instead.
 Building on that, chapters 8 and 9 explore how to use AI-driven algorithms to ana-
lyze stock performance and identify market trends. This then leads to chapter 11,
which explains the principles of algorithmic trading—techniques that automatically
execute trades when specific parameters or factors are met.
 A key part of any such strategy is backtesting. Like unit testing in software develop-
ment, backtesting assesses an algorithm by testing it against historical market data.
This process illustrates how the strategy would have performed in the past, offering
essential insights into its potential effectiveness before any capital is risked.
1.3.4 Portfolios and investing strategies
We can classify investment styles into three main categories: value, growth, and income
investing. These categories sometimes overlap. One approach is called Growth at a Rea-
sonable Price (GARP) , which combines value and growth investing. Let’s look at these
three types of investing next.
VALUE INVESTING
A value investor seeks to identify companies trading below their intrinsic value. These
opportunities often arise when the market overreacts to temporary setbacks, negative
news, or poor earnings reports, overlooking a company’s long-term potential. To spot
these deals, the investor carefully examines financial data, comparing key metrics and
ratios to identify genuine undervaluation. Chapter 2 covers the basics of applying
value investing.
GROWTH  INVESTING
A growth investor focuses on companies with the potential for rapid expansion, often
innovators in emerging sectors such as quantum computing and autonomous driving.
Success in these complex fields relies on a key principle popularized by legendary
investor Peter Lynch: your personal or professional knowledge of a domain can give
you a strong investment advantage.
 He famously argued that an amateur with specialized insight can often outperform
a professional without it. Chapter 4 is dedicated to this very idea, guiding you on how
to use your unique expertise to identify and analyze growth opportunities.
INCOME  INVESTING
An income investor focuses on assets that provide a consistent stream of passive
income. An income portfolio usually includes dividend-paying stocks, bonds that offer
regular interest payments, or real estate investment trusts (REITs). Chapter 5 centers
on income investments.

14 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
 Table 1.1 compares these three strategies, enabling readers to identify the approach
that best aligns with their risk profile, return goals, and time investment.
Many individuals employ a hybrid approach, carefully combining various methods to
achieve multiple financial goals. This approach may also include trading strategies in
conjunction with the investment strategies mentioned earlier. Often, this blended
method takes the form of a “core and satellite” portfolio:
The core —This is the foundation of the portfolio, focused on long-term invest-
ing. These assets are held with patience, allowing wealth to grow through com-
pounding and enabling primary growth goals to develop over time.
The satellites —Surrounding the core are more minor, more tactical divisions.
Investors can design these satellites for various purposes:
– A portion of the capital may be allocated for short-term trading to capitalize
on market fluctuations actively.
– Another portion can be invested in income-producing assets to generate a
steady stream of passive income, adding stability and cash flow to the overall
financial picture.
– This balanced structure enables individuals to maintain a disciplined, long-
term plan while also capitalizing on short-term opportunities and securing a
steady income.Table 1.1  Comparing growth, value, and income investing
Attribute Growth investing Value investing Income investing
Primary goal Capital appreciation Capital appreciation Regular income
Investor focus Future potential, 
innovationUndervalued “bargains” Consistent cash payouts
Typical company Young, innovative, rapidly 
expandingMature, stable, temporar-
ily unpopularEstablished, predictable, 
high cash flow
Dividends Low or none (profits are 
reinvested)Often pays dividends High and stable divi-
dends key
Key metrics High revenue growth, 
High P/ELow P/E, Low P/B* High dividend yield, 
stable cash flow
Risk profile High Low to moderate Low
Time horizon Long-term Medium to long term Any, but often for immedi-
ate needs
* P/E = price-to-earnings; P/B = price-to-booking. 

15 1.4 Risks and rewards
1.4 Risks and rewards
This book will also examine strategies that support investment and trading decisions.
Hedging  is a risk management tactic used to offset potential losses in an investment. By
taking an opposing position in a related asset, an investor can safeguard their portfo-
lio from adverse price movements. Essentially, hedging is akin to buying insurance; it
involves a tradeoff where you may sacrifice some potential gains to mitigate the risk of
a significant loss. Chapter 7 covers risk management, including hedging strategies.
 Figure 1.4 shows the returns of different assets. Should we simply choose the top
performers and move forward?
Past results don’t guarantee future outcomes. The market is unpredictable, and no set
of tools, techniques, or strategies guarantees success. As explained in chapter 12, start-
ups can return much more than other assets, but they are also the riskiest. As of June
2025, Bitcoin is valued at around $118,000. While an investor buying now might bene-
fit if the price increases from this point, they also face a realistic risk that it could drop
sharply and lose a significant portion of its value.
 Especially in recent years, it has become increasingly clear how fragile the stock
market is and how social media can sometimes have a more significant effect on share
prices than earnings reports. We’ve often seen the unpredictable actions of public fig-
ures causing overnight gains to disappear, only to rebound later.
 Warren Buffett once said, “Be fearful when others are greedy, and greedy when oth-
ers are fearful.” This principle advises caution during a rising bull market, especially
Stock (S&P 500)
Bonds (US Aggregate)
Cryptocurency (Bitcoin)Annual Returns of Stocks, Bonds, and Cryptocurrency (2018-2024)
Figure 1.4 Comparison of returns of stocks, bonds, and cryptocurrency (generated by ChatGPT)

16 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
when experienced investors begin to warn of underlying risks, such as high federal
debt or economic instability. In such times, it’s wise to resist the temptation to invest
aggressively.
1.5 A programmer’s unfair advantage
Forget stereotypes from pop culture and movies. Slick traders don’t run the modern
market in boardrooms; it’s a complex system of data, logic, and algorithms. It’s an
environment where you, as a programmer, have a natural and powerful advantage.
The skills you use every day to build software are the same skills that can create wealth.
1.5.1 You think in systems and data
Your job is to turn raw data into logical decisions. Whether you’re debugging from a
log file or analyzing performance metrics, you follow evidence, not emotion. Investing
is the same. A company’s financial statements are just datasets waiting for analysis.
Stock charts are patterns waiting to be recognized. While others rely on gut feelings,
you can do the following:
Perform fundamental analysis. Similar to debugging a program by inspecting its
core components, you can assess a company’s financial health (income, balance
sheets) to determine its intrinsic value.
Use quantitative tools.  The skills needed to analyze data or run scripts are directly
applicable to backtesting trading strategies and automating your research.
Build a system.  Programming involves developing rule-based systems. This skill is
essential for crafting a disciplined investment plan that steers clear of common
biases, such as panic selling or chasing hype.
1.5.2 Your mindset is built for the market
Beyond technical skills, your mindset has been prepared for the realities of investing.
Here are some mindset traits you can use to your advantage:
Patience and discipline —You understand the frustration of a tough bug and the
satisfaction that comes with finally fixing it. Successful investing is the highest
form of delayed gratification, requiring the same resilience to see a strategy
through to its conclusion.
Abstract thinking —You’re comfortable with abstractions, from APIs to complex
data structures. This helps in understanding intangible assets, such as stocks,
bonds, and derivatives, more easily. You can see the system, not just its parts.
Visionary thinking —You operate at the forefront of technology. You’re not just a
user of emerging trends in AI, virtual reality (VR), or biotech—you’re often a
creator. This domain knowledge provides you with a unique perspective on
which companies are set to shape the future.

17 Summary
1.5.3 Define your parameters
As a programmer, you can align your investment strategy with your life choices. Some
programmers choose a career that offers a high income, allowing them to retire early
with a solid financial plan.
 Other programmers might choose workplace flexibility over a fixed location and
become part of the growing community of digital nomads. Sometimes, the benefit
isn’t more money but lower expenses and taxes.
 The key to investment success is understanding your environment and goals. You
shape your investment philosophy, just as you would define the specs for a project:
How much risk can you handle? How much time will you dedicate? What are your eth-
ical boundaries?
 Answering these questions will help you develop a strong, personal strategy you
can follow, turning your natural advantages as a programmer into real-world results.
Note that this book doesn’t provide financial advice or recommend the purchase of
specific assets. It guides you in using your existing analytical skills to analyze securities,
ultimately supporting your decision-making process.
Summary
An investment is an asset or item acquired to generate income or appreciation.
Assets aren’t restricted to financial products. Each asset follows different rules
and principles to generate value. Nonfinancial assets can be complex for new
investors to trade as they are non-fungible (not interchangeable).
Unlike most other assets, financial assets are fungible, a feature that makes
them significantly easier to trade.
A share is a partial ownership of a publicly listed company. Therefore, every
investor could purchase a majority in publicly traded companies. Stocks are
usually purchased through stockbrokers.
Private equity is ownership in privately held companies that aren’t available on a
public stock exchange.
Derivatives are investments that are created from an underlying asset. A stock
option offers an investor the right to buy or sell a stock under predefined condi-
tions. You can also trade options, which means you can acquire or sell the right
to trade.
Selling stock options can provide you with a small income, but you might face
significant risks in some scenarios.
Dividends are payments made by a company to its shareholders in proportion
to the number of shares they hold. Not every company pays dividends. Coupon
payments, in contrast, are payments received for bonds.
Unlike stocks, bonds are associated with debt. Bondholders don’t own parts of
the organization to which they lend money; instead, they receive interest pay-
ments as compensation for their investment.

18 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
ETFs are pooled investments that are mostly passively managed and contain
multiple assets. Holding ETFs is generally considered less risky for investors
than holding stocks.
A hedge fund is a riskier investment vehicle that employs more advanced invest-
ment strategies, typically sold to a limited number of accredited investors and
institutions.
Cryptocurrency is an asset that enables people to transfer value without requir-
ing third-party involvement in transactions.
Although some assets are called risk-free, no asset is entirely without risk.
Programmers may possess a range of skills that enable them to make data-
driven investment decisions.
New investors benefit from defining investment goals before exploring invest-
ment strategies, as each strategy requires a different level of investment, risk tol-
erance, and time commitment.
This book doesn’t give financial advice. It aims to teach best practices for using
programming skills and AI to gain deeper insights and make more informed
investment decisions.

19Investment essentials
In chapter 1, we claimed that programmers’ traits can often make these wizards of
bits and bytes into outstanding investors. But traits (and brains) alone won’t do.
Take the following statement that you might find in any financial analysis of a share
price: “With a P/E ratio of over 25, this stock seems overvalued.” For someone new
to investing, sentences like that or dialogs between investors in movies such as Wall
Street  or The Big Short  might sound like a foreign language. In 2003, Eric Evans pub-
lished his book, Domain-Driven Design , which contains principles for creating soft-
ware in unfamiliar domains for software engineers. One cornerstone of these
principles is the use of ubiquitous language. This principle asserts that each domain
has developed its specialized language using terminology exclusive to domain
experts. An essential part of software engineering is learning to understand and
communicate effectively in this language. So, let’s start the next part of our journey
by getting deeper into the domain language of investment.
 Once we understand the domain language, we can easily interpret the previous
P/E ratio statement. A share  is a share of ownership in a company. As a tradableThis chapter covers
Core understanding of the investment domain
Metrics that help us find profitable investments
What to look for in financial reports

20 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
asset, a share may trade at a price below or above its intrinsic value. To assess a stock’s
valuation, we may investigate multiple metrics or ratios related to a company’s per-
formance. The price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio is a key financial metric related to a
company’s earnings.
 Finance is a complex domain; if one universal strategy led to guaranteed incredi-
ble riches in a short time, hedge funds wouldn’t compete for the best performance.
However, intelligent value investors have demonstrated that finding undervalued
stocks, when studying fundamentals, is possible. If you’re solely interested in the code,
feel free to proceed to the next chapter, where we demonstrate how to collect the
ratios and metrics introduced in this chapter using Python.
2.1 Accounting in a nutshell
Think of financial statements as a company’s source code. While they may seem cryp-
tic at first, once you learn to read them, they reveal precisely how a business is per-
forming. In this section, we explore the basics of reading the financial code because
investing without understanding at least the basics of accounting is like trying to cre-
ate a software application with zero programming skills.
 Companies follow global accounting standards. If one company reports numbers
in one way and another company in a different way, we would end up in chaos. One
powerful entity can compel companies to report data in a standardized manner: the
government, which requires these reports as a basis for taxation.
NOTE Just as programmers can misjudge a colleague’s source code at a
glance, investors can misinterpret financial statements. In both cases, context
is crucial, and a seemingly simple number may be misleading without it.
Admitting you were wrong is difficult, but making the initial mistake of judg-
ing code or numbers too quickly is a costly one.
Accounting standards haven’t existed since the beginning of stock exchanges. The
prevailing economic philosophy of laissez-faire capitalism in the roaring twenties
extended to corporate reporting. There were no federal laws compelling companies
to disclose financial information to the public. While the New York Stock Exchange
had some listing requirements, they weren’t rigorously enforced, and there was no
uniform standard for the information that needed to be provided. The stock market
crash of 1929, which led to the Great Depression and caused widespread pain, had
multiple root causes. Missing accounting standards exacerbated the problem, and,
not surprisingly, the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)  were established in
response to the crash.
 These accounting standards establish a stable baseline by mandating a consistent
method for companies to report their financial information. Violating them can be
costly, sometimes even threatening a company’s existence. In addition to GAAP, there’s
a second standard, the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS),  which is used
in the international market. These standards differ in detail, but these differences are

21 2.1 Accounting in a nutshell
irrelevant to a programmer’s book on investments. What counts is that all companies
are required to report their findings in three documents that are the basis for all key
financial metrics that investors discuss:
Income statement —How much revenue a business makes and how much it spends
Balance sheet —What assets a business owns and what it owes
Cashflow statement —How much cash the business generates
We can safely assume that every public company provides these three documents.
Whether it’s Apple, Walmart, Coca-Cola, or a non-US company such as Rolls-Royce or
Deutsche Bank, they similarly calculate revenue and expenses, although the numbers
in the sheets might differ according to the business model. Every company reports all
three statements quarterly.
NOTE As this is a book for programmers, we keep the description of account-
ing statements to a minimum; however, some basic knowledge is necessary to
perform a financial analysis. Sites such as Investopedia ( www.investopedia
.com/ ) can provide you with more detailed information on monetary terms.
2.1.1 Income statement
An income statement shows the company’s performance over a year or a quarter.
Figure 2.1 also shows the relationship of the income statement to other statements.
Income Statement
Revenue
-      Cost of Goods Sold
Gross Proﬁt
-      Operating Expenses
Operating Income
-      Income Tax
Net IncomeCash Flow Statement
Cash Flow Operating Activities
Incl. Net Income
Cash Flow from Investing
Cash Flow from Financing
Net Increase in cash
Balance Sheet
Assets Liabilities
-      Current Assets -      Current Liabilities
-      Long-Term Assets - Long-Term Liabilities
Shareholder Equity (Asset − Liabilities)
Figure 2.1 This illustrates a simplified relationship between the accounting statement and its 
interconnection.

22 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
Investors typically compare a given quarter with the same quarter from previous years,
as many business conditions fluctuate on an annual cycle. Consider how much retail
companies are affected by Christmas sales or the holiday season. Therefore, for some
companies, Q4—the quarter of the Christmas season—might be decisive for their
overall success.
 The main components of an income statement are as follows:
Revenue —Total income from sales or services
Expenses —Costs incurred to generate revenues
Net income —Revenue minus expenses, indicating profit or loss
If I receive $1 today, it’s worth more than $1 I receive in a year. This concept is called
the time value of money . I can invest this dollar today and earn interest on it. At a 5%
annual interest rate, $1 becomes $1.05 in one year. Inflation also affects the time value
of money, meaning I can buy less with one uninvested dollar in a year than I can today,
as consumer prices tend to rise on average.
 Imagine a company that consistently generates the same net income over 10 years.
Over this period, the real value generated decreases each year. Investors typically
expect a successful company to increase both revenue and net income over time.
 Analyzing a company’s accounting statements over time helps in formulating
hypotheses about its performance and operations. Let’s explore this using a simplified
financial model of a fictional consulting firm, which is based on aggregated account-
ing data. This model has the following characteristics, as shown in figure 2.2:
Revenue is generated by selling services.
Research and development (R&D) investments encompass training, personnel
certification, and new skill development.
Service costs are primarily the salaries of employees performing billable work.
We continue to monitor the company’s financial statements over time and are inter-
ested in seeing if these numbers change significantly. Let’s imagine after studying
their latest income statement, we discover that R&D expenses increased enormously.
The company finances this increase in research with foreign capital, as shown in fig-
ure 2.3.
 Just by looking at the increased R&D expenses without any further details, we can
take a guess at what’s going on here to come up with theories and create a bullish
(optimistic) and a bearish (pessimistic) hypothesis:
Bullish hypothesis —They must have acquired new projects that will start soon for
which they train new consultants, or they are preparing to sell new services to
existing customers. The company will see a significant increase in its earnings
soon. If investors panic due to additional foreign capital acquired by the com-
pany to finance further research, causing the share price to drop, this company
is a perfect buying opportunity.

23 2.1 Accounting in a nutshell
Revenue to Expenses Distribution
Revenue (100%)R&D (10%)
Services (70%)
Other Expenses (20%)Income Expenses
Figure 2.2 A simplified model of a consulting company that makes its money on selling services and 
spends most of it on employee salaries
Revenue to Expenses Distribution
Revenue+Foreign Capital (100%)R&D (25%)
Services (58.33%)
Other Expenses (16.67%)Income Expenses
Figure 2.3 Here, the R&D expenses have increased, and the additional expenses are covered with 
foreign capital.

24 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
Bearish hypothesis —The company had to attract foreign capital to continue operat-
ing. Maybe they are in trouble. If their business goes bad, we might not see the
effect right away on their accounting sheets. We need to monitor the next income
statements to see if their income goes down and if they start cutting expenses. If
they plan to roll out new services and fail, they will incur additional debt and may
run into liquidity problems. It may be better not to invest in that company.
Consider an alternative scenario in which the company reduces its spending on ser-
vices and R&D, while the revenue is unaffected. Figure 2.4 outlines this scenario.
This scenario suggests that the company may see little room for growth. Instead of try-
ing to increase profits by selling more, they monetize existing revenues. Financial
experts may examine the interest rate set by the Federal Reserve or the central bank
to determine whether that company’s strategy is tied to an economic cycle. Many com-
panies prefer to invest less when interest rates are high and the economy is in a reces-
sion. But still, all we can do is create hypotheses about what’s happening:
Bullish hypothesis —The company still provides the same number of services for
existing clients for less expense costs, which indicates they do more work for the
same money. Maybe the company became more efficient thanks to AI and auto-
mated its processes. As it creates a surplus, the company might become a divi-
dend-paying stock. This is an opportunity to generate passive income.Revenue to Expenses Distribution
Revenue (100%)R&D (5%)
Services (60%)
Other Expenses (20%)
Surplus (15%)Income Expenses
Figure 2.4 Here, the company reduces spending on research and services.

25 2.1 Accounting in a nutshell
Bearish hypothesis —A company’s value increases if it grows. If the company cuts
down on research, it will likely not grow. Having a surplus is fine, but if we don’t
know what the company is planning to do, it’s better not to invest.
This was a simplified model, used for demonstration purposes, for a type of company
that is relatively easy to model. Consulting companies can be relatively straightforward,
as expenses are often linked to income. Consultants work on client projects. The com-
pany makes a profit by selling consultancy services at a higher price than their salary
expenses. Other companies are far more challenging to model. For example, think of a
conglomerate such as Alphabet, for which you need to consider subsidiaries (e.g.,
Waymo) that operate in multiple domains from advertising to cloud computing.
 Another challenge is that we reduced our model to a minimum of parameters for
demonstration purposes. The reality is more complex. At the same time, if you ana-
lyze concrete companies, you have more resources, such as media reports on the com-
pany and interviews with analysts who know the company well. Data-driven investors
can build models of companies and create their own priorities regarding what they
consider to be essential for a company’s value. The essentials might vary from business
to business as well.
NOTE Companies in different industries operate on vastly different business
models. A tech firm such as Apple spends enormous sums on R&D to create a
few high-revenue products. In contrast, supermarket chain Walmart focuses
on selling a high volume of products from many suppliers. For Walmart,
innovation isn’t about creating new products, but about optimizing storage
and supply chains while maintaining quality service. Therefore, comparing
metrics such as R&D spending between Apple and Walmart would be mis-
leading—it’s like comparing apples and oranges. An investor can achieve a
far more insightful analysis by comparing companies within the same indus-
try, such as evaluating Walmart against direct competitor Costco.
The income statement reveals how much a company earns and how it allocates its
expenses, which helps us evaluate a company’s strategy. To complete our tour of finan-
cial statements and gain a comprehensive picture, we must now determine what the
company already owns. We get this information from the balance sheet.
2.1.2 Balance sheet
The income sheet tells us what a company made in a period by listing the revenue
generated and the expenses. The information that a company already owns or owes
still needs to be added. The essence of a balance sheet can be reduced to this simple
formula:
Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders’ equity
Assets  are what a company owns, liabilities  are what it owes, and shareholder equity  is the
amount shareholders would get paid if all assets were liquidated and the debts were
paid. A company may be in serious trouble when its liabilities exceed its assets.

26 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
 Liquidity  is a metric that tells how easily an asset can be converted to cash. Imagine
a manufacturing company that puts one of its factories, along with all of its machinery,
up for sale. It may take some time to find a potential buyer. Other assets, such as
inventory goods, may have better liquidity.
NOTE Do you think like an economist? Consider everything you own—
computers, cars, or clothing—would you list these items as nonliquid assets?
Or do you count only your financial assets as part of your net value? Thinking
as an economist, you might list all of your belongings as part of your wealth.
Programmers often work on projects to reduce capital expenses (CapEx) for their cli-
ents or employers. Cloud migration may be the best reference for such projects, as
companies decide that they prefer renting over owning hardware with such a move.
Some investors also claim that software companies are popular investments because
they aren’t capital-intensive. Low CapEx is often considered low risk, as it requires less
initial investment, even though operating expenses (OpEx) may be higher.
NOTE Engineers sometimes perceive economic soundness differently than
business administrators. Think of an on-premise platform that solves business
problems with minimal OpEx. While engineers might view the investment as
sound, if costs are reduced permanently and a return on investment is
achieved over time, business administrators may be more cautious. Among
other things, they might argue that higher up-front CapEx may lead to lower
liquidity, and he raises the question of opportunity costs and the real total
cost of ownership.
The balance sheet might differ significantly between industries. Software companies
may have almost no assets listed as inventory, whereas supermarket chains must
maintain a large inventory to quickly supply customers with goods. Additionally,
you’ll find inventory listed under current assets in companies such as NVIDIA,
which sell hardware.
 The balance sheet already indicated that having more liabilities than assets is an
alarm signal. However, there’s another detail to analyze after we understand that the
accounts payable and accounts receivable entries on a balance sheet indicate that we
might have some incoming or outgoing money in our books, but not yet in our posses-
sion. It’s possible that a company can’t pay its bills, even if its books show a positive bal-
ance. A third financial statement—the cash flow statement—can give us more details
on a company’s solvency.
2.1.3 Free cash flow
Obviously, we can’t pay bills with all forms of assets. Free cash flow (FCF)  is the amount
of cash remaining after a company has covered its operational costs and CapEx.
Here’s the simplified formula of FCF:
Free cash flow = Operating cash flow – Capital expenditures

27 2.1 Accounting in a nutshell
Operating cash flow refers to the cash a company generates through its normal busi-
ness operations. More than any other document, this statement reveals whether the
company is financially stable, can afford new investments, and can pay its bills without
incurring additional debt.
Each accounting statement will still contain many unfamiliar terms if you don’t have a
degree in business administration. Explaining each term in this book isn’t possible, so
be sure to look up and research terms as you run across any you’re unsure of.
 As a programmer, you’ve seen code written for web applications, data processing,
or embedded systems, and each domain requires different best practices, depending
on the resources available. This same principle applies to companies. Only some of
the best practices are effective for certain companies. Companies are distinct, and
understanding this difference is crucial if you want to invest in them.
 
 Why cash flow matters
Imagine Eugene owns a prestigious antique car business that purchases, renovates,
and sells these vintage beauties to car enthusiasts. He has invested a lot of money
in a garage and a small factory hall, where he also stores a vast inventory of rare
replacement parts. You’re transported to a different era in the garage when you see
all the Studebakers, Packards, and classic Chevy Impalas. 
One day, Eugene looks at his books and realizes he has run out of cash. He had pre-
viously found a treasure trove. A wealthy collector of old cars had passed away, and
Eugene acquired a vast collection of rare old vehicles from the heirs at a significantly
reduced price. Eugene knows that he can sell all those cars with a huge profit margin,
but buying all these cars required him to use all of his cash reserves, and he must
even take a loan from his local bank.
Some salary and other payments are due soon, so he can only keep his business in
operation by borrowing more money. His local bank, which had already given him the
first loan, is hesitant to give him a second one and is inquiring about securities.
Eugene’s cars and equipment might be worth millions; some clients might even owe
him money. However, he can’t pay the plumber who fixes his restrooms in the shop
by giving away a car or a client’s debt. Therefore, a vehicle in Eugene’s inventory isn’t
a liquid asset.
If Eugene proves that his business outlook is good, he’ll most likely get a loan from
the bank. Still, this example suggests one idea we can explore with algorithms: the
risk that a company may be insolvent.

28 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
2.2 Industry classification
Before discussing financial metrics and ratios, let’s examine the possible sectors and
industries to understand potential differences in how companies generate revenues and
allocate their expenditures. Figure 2.5 outlines a categorization of sectors according to
the Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) of S&P ( www.spglobal.com/spdji/
en/landing/topic/gics/ ), a standard used to categorize companies based on their
business models.
NOTE GICS is one standard among multiple official industry classification
standards. Investors, such as Peter Lynch, have created their own unofficial
systems. Be sure to explore these standards independently, as they offer dif-
ferent perspectives on companies that can help you better understand them.
We use GICS in this book due to its widespread global use and recognition.
GICS groups companies on four levels. The sector (e.g., Utilities) represents the high-
est level, and subindustries are at the most detailed level. Different categorizations of
businesses help to separate them by business models. Each business model may affect
the financial metrics and ratios to watch. Governments regulate specific sectors more
heavily, and changes in law have a greater effect on companies in these sectors than
on others. Other sectors might be more affected by increased interest rates or eco-
nomic cycles than others. 
2.2.1 Influences on GICS sectors
In this chapter, we aim to identify factors that can influence a company, enabling us to
build models later. If we know, for instance, that a sector is influenced by interest
rates, economic cycles, and raw material costs, we can try to build a machine learning
(ML) model that predicts stock prices based on these input factors as features of the
ML model. In table 2.1, we introduce the GICS sectors and the key factors that may
influence the price of an asset in each sector.
Energy Materials IndustrialsConsumer
DiscretionaryConsumer
StaplesHealth
Care FinancialsInformation
TechnologyCommunication
Services UtilitiesReal
Estate
11 Sectors
25 Industry
Groups
74 Industries
163 Sub-
Industries
Figure 2.5 All sectors with icons based on the GICS standard used in many financial platforms (Source: 
www.msci.com/our-solutions/indexes/gics )

29 2.2 Industry classification
Some categorizations of companies might be misleading. Many would consider Ama-
zon, Tesla, and Google to be companies in the information technology sector. GICS
categorizes Amazon and Tesla in the Consumer Discretionary sector, and Google in
the Communication Services sector. Still, when looking up ratios, it makes sense to
look up the company’s sector to add context.Table 2.1 GICS sectors and their influences
Sector What it does Influenced by
Utilities Companies that provide essential ser-
vices such as electricity, water, and 
natural gas Interest rates, energy prices, regulation, 
and bond yields
Consumer Sta-
ples Companies that produce essential prod-
ucts such as food, beverages, and 
household items Interest rates, inflation, consumer confi-
dence, and raw material costs
Consumer 
Discretionary Companies that produce nonessential 
goods and services, including automo-
biles, apparel, and leisure Consumer spending, unemployment 
rates, and disposable income 
Communication 
Services Companies that provide communication 
services, including telecom and media Government regulation, intense competi-
tion, technology changes, general eco-
nomic conditions, consumer and 
business confidence, spending, and 
changes in consumer and business pref-
erences
Real Estate Companies involved in the development, 
management, and operation of real 
properties Demographic changes, interest rates, 
economic cycle, government policies, 
housing demand, and economic growth
Information 
Technology Companies that produce software, hard-
ware, or semiconductor equipment, and 
companies that provide internet or 
related services Innovation, cybersecurity threats, and 
regulatory changes
Energy Companies that play a role in extracting, 
refining, or supplying consumable fuels Oil prices, geopolitical stability, and 
renewable energy trends
Health Care Companies that provide medical ser-
vices, manufacture medical equipment, 
or develop pharmaceuticals Pandemics, regulation, drug pricing, and 
demographic changes
Financials Companies that provide financial ser-
vices, including banking, insurance, and 
investment Interest rates, economic cycles, and reg-
ulatory changes
Industrials Companies that produce goods used in 
construction and manufacturing, includ-
ing machinery and equipmentManufacturing output, trade policies, and 
commodity prices
Materials Companies that provide raw materials 
used in the manufacturing process, 
including metals and chemicals Commodity prices, supply chain stability, 
and environmental regulations

30 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
2.2.2 Sectors and economic cycles
In an economic crisis with unpleasant side effects, such as high unemployment rates
or high inflation, it makes sense that some businesses are more affected than others.
To demonstrate the effect of economic cycles on share prices, let’s pick four suspects—
Microsoft, Coca-Cola, Walmart, and Ford—and check their share prices during the
2008 financial crisis, when the housing market collapsed. For table 2.2, we used an
interval from January 1, 2008, to January 1, 2010.
Even if we only look at the numbers, it’s evident that Ford’s value declined far more
steeply than Walmart’s, falling to just one-tenth of its previous value at its lowest point.
A bar chart accentuates the changes even more clearly in figure 2.6.
 This chart makes sense because Ford and Microsoft produce products that con-
sumers can drop more easily. If resources are scarce, postponing the purchase of
a new car may be a viable option, but choosing not to go to the supermarket, even in a
crisis, isn’t possible; we still have to eat. Let’s examine how various sectors performed
during the 2008 financial crisis.
 One way to improve this exploration is to compare sector indices. A sector index is
a collection of multiple companies within a single sector, which can also be referred to
by their respective tickers. In figure 2.7, we look at XLK (Technology sector), XLP
(Consumer Staples), and XLY (Consumer Discretionary). The graph shows what com-
mon sense has already told us: companies producing goods for everyday needs are less
affected by crises.Investing only in companies whose business you understand
Warren Buffett recommends investing only in businesses that you understand. A
supermarket chain such as Walmart is different from a tech company. If a tech com-
pany launches a successful product, it may be reflected in its yearly results (think of
the effect of the iPhone on Apple’s business). However, the best-selling product of a
supermarket chain won’t have a visible effect on an accounting statement.
Reading accounting statements of a company and understanding what they mean, as
well as being able to interpret changes in numbers, may not make you an accountant,
yet. However, being able to interpret the numbers and connect them to the com-
pany’s business model provides a foundation for making wise investment decisions.
Table 2.2 Highs and lows of selected share prices from 2008 to 2010
Microsoft (MSFT) Coca-Cola (KO) Walmart (WMT) Ford (F)
High 35.95 32.79 21.28 10.37
Low 14.87 18.72 14.37 1.01
Avg. 24.82 25.65 17.60 5.42

31 2.2 Industry classification
Comparison of High, Low, and Avg Values for Companies (Grayscale)
Values
Microsoft (MSFT) Coca-Cola (KO) Walmart (WMT) Ford (F)
Company35.95
14.8724.8232.79
18.7225.65
21.28
14.3717.6
10.37
1.015.4235
30
25
20
15
10
5
0High
Low
Avg
Figure 2.6 Data from the table shown in a bar chart makes the drop in value of some companies more obvious.
Figure 2.7 The effect of the 2008 housing market crisis on selected indices XLK (Technology), XLP (Consumer 
Staples), and XLY (Consumer Discretionary)

32 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
A company’s performance is fundamentally linked to the economic cycle, which con-
sists of four stages: expansion, peak, contraction, and trough. During an economic
expansion, rising employment and disposable income boost spending on nonessential
goods. Conversely, during a contraction, consumers prioritize essentials and cut back
on discretionary items. This dynamic reveals that some companies are highly cyclical ,
with their success directly tied to the health of the economy. In contrast, others are
noncyclical  or defensive , remaining stable during economic downturns. This sensitivity
extends beyond business cycles, as other macroeconomic forces—such as government
fiscal policy, interest rates, inflation, commodity prices, and currency exchange rates—
also affect industries in vastly different ways. 
2.3 Capitalization
As we now understand that companies in different industries and sectors may react
differently to market conditions, we might develop an “invest in too-big-to-fail compa-
nies” investment hypothesis. While smaller companies might perish in a crisis and lose
their invested money permanently, we can bet on big companies that will survive all
crises and consistently grow over the years, on average.
 Before we challenge this idea, let’s first define what larger  or smaller  means in this
context. The number of employees at a company can be a misleading indicator of
size. A more suitable metric for investors to consider is capitalization. In short, capital-
ization  refers to the value that people are willing to pay for the company at the current
time. Investors calculate a public company’s capitalization by multiplying the total
amount of outstanding shares of a stock by the current stock price.
 Although many companies with a small market capitalization (e.g., start-ups and
small and midsize enterprises [SMEs]) are private and so not listed on stock exchanges,
the difference between companies on the stock market can still be vast. We can group
companies as follows (with some slight variations in different markets):
Mega-cap —Market value of $200 billion or more
Large-cap —Market value between $10 billion and $200 billion
Mid-cap —Market value between $2 billion and $10 billion
Small-cap —Market value between $250 million and $2 billion
Micro-cap —Market value of less than $250 million
A mega-cap company’s bankruptcy risk is lower than that of companies with a lower
market capitalization. At the same time, finding tenbaggers —a term coined by Peter
Lynch for an investment that returns 10 times its initial purchase price—is much
more likely with a micro-cap stock. They have far more room to grow.
NOTE Intrinsic value reflects an asset’s true worth, which can be estimated
using various methods, such as discounted cash flow analysis or other funda-
mental valuation techniques. Even with rigorous analysis, every intrinsic value
estimate carries a degree of uncertainty. The greater the gap between an
asset’s market capitalization and its estimated intrinsic value, the larger the
potential investment opportunity.

33 2.4 Metrics and ratios
Mega-cap companies, such as NVIDIA, Apple, or Microsoft, differ significantly from
those with a considerably lower market value. Investors who own shares in mega-cap
companies may sit out crises, as the likelihood of bankruptcy is low. Companies with a
viable business model will eventually return to their earlier, higher share prices. Share-
holders of smaller companies may be more concerned about worst-case scenarios. The
smaller the company, the higher the risk, but also the higher the chance for gains.
Many experienced investors, for this reason, love to explore smaller companies and
mitigate risks by conducting more thorough due diligence and in-depth research.
 If we look back in time and examine the fate of companies with the highest market
capitalization over the decades, we’ll see that some past winners have lost their signifi-
cance or disappeared. Even Jeff Bezos claims that Amazon might fail at some point in
the future ( https:/ /mng.bz/pZR0 ). Trusting that giants on the stock market will always
survive might end up like betting during the Jurassic era that some large reptiles are
too big to go extinct. Instead, the stock market is akin to the survival of the fittest, and
it makes sense to investigate the fundamentals of companies.
2.4 Metrics and ratios
With knowledge of a company’s classification and capitalization, we have a basis to go
on. We might pick companies in a sector we understand and choose companies to
invest in. Now, we need to learn more about a company’s fitness. A metric  is a statement
about a company’s performance. One example is the dividend yield, which indicates
the amount of dividends per share. We get most metrics from the accounting state-
ments. A ratio is a statement about a relationship between two independent  metrics. The
price-to-earnings ratio (P/E) measures the share price relative to the earnings per
share (EPS).
 Understanding financial metrics is much like evaluating software quality. In soft-
ware development, metrics such as code readability are essential; however, a cata-
strophic score in one area—such as a high crash rate—demands immediate action
from team leaders, regardless of how elegant the code may be. Similarly, in finance, a
company might appear strong. Still, a critical red flag from a single ratio, such as an
inability to pay its bills, signals serious trouble that forces management to take action.
 Conversely, just as no single metric can guarantee a high-quality product, a few
good financial ratios alone don’t confirm a company’s health or future success. A
common investment mistake is to fixate on one impressive number while ignoring
potential weaknesses elsewhere. The key in both fields is a holistic evaluation. By ana-
lyzing multiple metrics and comparing them to those of industry peers, we can
develop a strong and reliable indicator of a company’s overall performance.
NOTE It’s impossible to cover all ratios used in the financial industry. There-
fore, this subset of possible ratios might be interesting when assessing poten-
tial investments. Web pages such as the Terms page from FullRatio ( https:/ /
fullratio.com/terms ) give more context to what each ratio could mean for an
industry.

34 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
To assess a company’s overall status, we must consider multiple factors. As we’ll
demonstrate in chapter 3, platforms with stock screeners, such as Finviz, provide an
excellent overview of company data. Let’s examine some ratios for NVIDIA and
Walmart in table 2.3. The Beta column refers to a measure of a stock’s volatility—or
systematic risk—in relation to the overall market.
We find some noteworthy differences in the numbers. Walmart’s revenue is signifi-
cantly higher. However, the supermarket chain also has approximately 60 times the
number of NVIDIA’s employees. Having lots of employees also means high expenses.
A supermarket chain also needs to maintain a lot of infrastructure and inventory.
However, as mentioned already in the section on sectors and economic cycles, during
economic downturns, customers will still visit supermarkets to buy food.
 In contrast, some individuals and companies will delay technology purchases if they
don’t have sufficient funds. A low beta value of a stock—Walmart has a beta of 0.69, and
NVIDIA has a beta of 2.12—reflects its resilience against market risks. We observe con-
siderable differences in expected values across GICS sectors, as well as in other ratios.
2.4.1 Liquidity
In the simplest terms, liquidity  measures a company’s ability to pay bills. If you collect
information on multiple companies in a DataFrame, you might find problematic out-
liers. In this chapter, we explore two ratios: the current ratio and the quick ratio.
 The current ratio  measures a company’s ability to pay its short-term liabilities with its
assets. This is calculated by dividing the current assets by the current liabilities. We can
collect both values from the balance sheet.
 The quick ratio  is more stringent. It only considers assets, such as cash, marketable
securities, and receivables, that the company can use to pay short-term debts today
and omits assets such as inventory. The liquidity ratios as of June 8, 2025, for Walmart,
Altria, NVIDIA, and Salesforce are shown in table 2.4.Table 2.3 Selected ratios of NVIDIA and Walmart
Company Market cap Sales Employees P/E Beta
NVIDIA 3457.97B 148.51B 36,000 45.65 2.12
Walmart 779.85B 685.09B 2,100,000 41.81 0.69 
Data from the Finviz platform on June 8, 2025 (for the latest data, go to https:/ /finviz.com/quote.ashx?t=NVDA&p=d  or 
https:/ /finviz.com/quote.ashx?t=WMT&p=d )
Table 2.4 Liquidity ratios for Walmart, Altria, NVIDIA, and Salesforce
Company Sector Industry Current ratio Quick ratio
Walmart (WMT) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 0.780 0.185
Atria (MO) Consumer Defensive Tobacco 0.571 0.468

35 2.4 Metrics and ratios
The table provides insights about sectors. Technology companies tend to have
higher liquidity ratios, which can also be explained by their business models. If we
consider discount stores such as Walmart, we can imagine the amount of capital
these companies have in inventory or goods still to be sold. Nobody wants to go into
a store and find only a minimum of products on the shelves, as supermarket chains
want to improve their liquidity ratios and only buy new products once the old ones
are out of stock.
 Again, this statement shows that we can’t compare the ratios between different
sectors. Table 2.5 is more interesting for a financial analysis, as it compares Walmart,
Costco, Target, and Dollar Tree, which are peer companies. We can compare the
companies based on these returns and have a basis for discussing which one is per-
forming better.
As we delve into the numbers at the micro level for the same sector, we need to take a
deeper dive into them with a different mindset to make key decisions. Perhaps the
insight from one category alone isn’t enough for an investment decision, but it can
still influence that decision. An investor knowledgeable in discount stores might
examine all of these numbers and deduce that Costco has a better ratio than Walmart. 
NOTE Value investors know what makes businesses in the sectors they under-
stand successful and look for confirmation in numbers. They often spend a
considerable amount of time comparing metrics they have selected based on
their understanding of the business. For value investors, sophisticated score-
cards of carefully chosen metrics and ratios can be key decision-making factors.NVIDIA (NVDA) Technology Semiconductors 3.388 2.857
Salesforce (CRM) Technology Software - Application 1.069 0.899
Data collected from the yfinance library on June 8, 2025
Table 2.5 Liquidity ratios for Walmart, Costco, Target, and Dollar Tree
Company Sector Industry Current ratio Quick ratio
Walmart (WMT) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 0.780 0.185
Costco (COST) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 1.015 0.472
Target (TGT) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 0.935 0.152
Dollar Tree (DLTR) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 1.044 0.122
Data collected using yfinance on June 8, 2025Table 2.4 Liquidity ratios for Walmart, Altria, NVIDIA, and Salesforce  (continued)
Company Sector Industry Current ratio Quick ratio

36 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
2.4.2 Debt
In a financial sense, debt is all liabilities with interest-bearing obligations. The debt-to-
equity (D/E) ratio is calculated by dividing a company’s total liabilities by its total
shareholders’ equity. This ratio is a key indicator of a company’s financial leverage,
showing the proportion of debt used to finance its assets compared to equity. A higher
ratio indicates a greater reliance on debt financing, which can increase financial risk.
Let’s look again at some examples in table 2.6.
This chart highlights the need to look beyond surface-level metrics. While Apple’s
debt-to-equity ratio seems 10 times worse than NVIDIA’s, the number reflects a delib-
erate financial strategy, not necessarily poor health.
 Apple strategically issues highly rated corporate bonds at very low interest rates to
finance its research, development, and other growth initiatives. For investors, this debt
isn’t a red flag if the interest rates are close to or below the rate of inflation. In that sce-
nario, the company is using low-cost leverage as a powerful tool to fund growth, turning
a seemingly poor ratio into a sign of sophisticated capital management.
 The interest coverage ratio, not shown in the table but a key metric to explore in
an analysis focused on debt, is a crucial indicator used to assess a company’s ability to
pay the interest on its outstanding debt easily. It’s calculated by dividing a company’s
Earnings Before Interest and Taxes (EBIT) by its interest expenses for a given period.
A result below 1.0 is a universal red flag, indicating that the company’s current profits
are insufficient to cover its interest obligations, which signals significant financial dis-
tress regardless of the industry.
2.4.3 Earnings
We collect the raw earnings data from the income statements to calculate ratios. The
earnings per share (EPS)  metric mentioned earlier serves as the basis for many key ratios.
This metric measures the company’s profits for each outstanding share. The EPS is
calculated with the following formula:
(Profit – Preferred dividends) ÷ Shares outstanding
In earnings calls, companies inform their shareholders about quarterly results. Com-
panies retrospectively assess past earnings from previous quarters and estimate theirTable 2.6 Liquidity ratios for Apple, Walmart, and NVIDIA
Company Sector Industry Debt-to-equity 
Apple (AAPL) Technology Consumer Electronics 146.994 
Walmart (WMT) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 74.138
NVIDIA (NVDA) Technology Semiconductors 12.267
Data collected using yfinance on June 8, 2025

37 2.4 Metrics and ratios
earnings for the following quarters. Whether the numbers are above or below expec-
tations can affect the stock price.
 Free cash flow per share  is a profitability metric that measures the total amount of FCF
generated by the company attributed to each share over one year. A good ratio of
FCF underlines that a company can expand business operations, pay down debt, or
return capital to shareholders. The formula follows: 
Free cash flow per share = Free cash flow (FCF) ÷ Shares outstanding
FCF is calculated by the following: 
Operating cash flow – CapEx
The earnings ratios are mostly interesting for valuation purposes, as earnings are
often used as a basis to evaluate the company. So, it makes sense to continue there.
2.4.4 Valuation
Suppose a start-up claims to be valued at $100 million. What does this mean? A third
party believes that $100 million could be a fair price for acquiring a specific start-up.
However, if a potential buyer is willing to pay this amount, that’s another story. These
valuations are often rough estimates based on data provided by the start-up. Compa-
nies considering a purchase of that start-up may come up with entirely different num-
bers after a more detailed assessment. In the worst case, buyers aren’t interested in
buying the start-up at all, even close to its valuation.
 Start-up valuation can be tricky. Proper valuation, such as with the discounted cash
flow (DCF) method,  requires sound accounting practices over multiple years. This
demand raises questions: Has the start-up reported enough years with all the thor-
oughness necessary for a sound assessment? What if the third party doing the valua-
tion benefits from giving a high rating? (They might attract other start-ups by giving
high valuations in general.)
 Start-up valuations are often rough estimates of a start-up’s worth, assuming every-
thing goes as planned and there are no hidden problems. According to the efficient
market theory, the share price on a stock exchange reflects all available market infor-
mation, causing the valuation of public companies to be more accurate. We multiply
the stock price by the number of shares outstanding and obtain the company’s market
capitalization . Some investors challenge this assumption and try to use valuation met-
rics to find undervalued companies. We can do the same: let’s learn valuation ratios
quickly and complement our knowledge by comparing ratios using practice examples.
 We observed that EPS is a crucial metric. If an EPS diverges strongly from the pre-
vious report, it’s a strong buy or sell signal for investors.
NOTE The exact formula for EPS also subtracts a metric of preferred divi-
dends from the net income, which can be ignored for this example.

38 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
We’ve defined EPS earlier. We calculate the price for $1 of earnings (price-to-earn-
ings) by dividing the share price by EPS. The P/E ratio is essential for determining
whether a stock is overvalued or undervalued.
 If we take the time to explore the P/E ratios of multiple companies, we’ll soon
learn that they vary significantly. If NVIDIA has a P/E ratio of 47.61 and Pfizer one of
10.43, as of January 31, does this mean NVIDIA is overvalued, and Pfizer is underval-
ued? The reality is not so simple. We need to compare the P/E ratio of a company
with a baseline. One baseline could be the S&P 500 index. At the time of writing, the
P/E ratio of the S&P 500 was around 30. However, this is still vague. The average P/E
ratios vary by sector, so it may be more effective to compare a company’s P/E value
with that of its peers. In this example, the sector median is 25.31, which indicates that
NVIDIA is overvalued. But there’s still one problem. The P/E ratio doesn’t include
projected growth. By dividing the P/E ratio by EPS growth, we get another standard
ratio, the price/earnings-to-growth ratio (PEG). Let’s take a snapshot of NVIDIA’s val-
uation as of June 8, 2025, shown in table 2.7. 
Table 2.7 A snapshot of NVIDIA’s valuation
Sector 
relative gradeNVIDIASector 
median% diff. to 
sectorNVIDIA 
5Y avg.% diff. to 
5Y avg.
P/E Non-GAAP (TTM) D 44.43 22.20 100.10 63.09 29.59
P/E Non-GAAP (FWD) C- 33.14 22.64 46.38 47.38 30.05
P/E GAAP (TTM) C- 45.71 28.17 62.22 83.84 45.49
P/E GAAP (FWD) C 35.04 29.14 20.24 62.08 43.56
PEG GAAP (TTM) B 0.56 0.91 -38,45 — NM
PEG Non-GAAP (FWD) B+ 1.15 1.73 -33.48 1.80 36.21
FWD, forward (future financial performance); TTM, trailing 12 months (most recent 12-month period); NM, nonmeaningful 
value
Data taken from Seeking Alpha on June 8, 2025 (for the latest data, go to https:/ /mng.bz/Gwm8 )
Which story do you want to tell?
In June 2024, NVIDIA became the most valuable company in the world, with a total
valuation of over $3 trillion. The snapshot of NVIDIA shows that it’s up to us to decide
which story to tell with the data.
The P/E ratio, as of January 31, 2025, is calculated using a share price of $124.65,
resulting in a P/E ratio of 47.61. The sector median is 25. In addition, NVIDIA’s P/E
ratio is far above its peers. We could stop here and conclude that it’s unwise to buy
shares in a company where you pay more than double for each earnings compared
to similar companies.

39 2.4 Metrics and ratios
The price-to-sales  ratio reflects the price per $1 of sales. Sales figures are generally con-
sidered relatively reliable, whereas other income statement items, such as earnings,
can be manipulated by various accounting rules. For early-stage companies that aren’t
yet profitable, sales growth, as represented by this metric, can be a good indicator of
future success. The price-to-book  ratio is how much you pay for $1 of equity. It reflects
the market’s valuation of the company’s net assets on its balance sheet and is particu-
larly attractive for capital-intensive companies.
 After this brief introduction to ratios, we can make them more meaningful by look-
ing at some examples. For this, we select two technology companies (Apple and
NVIDIA), one utility company (Sempra), a supermarket chain (Walmart), and a bev-
erages company (Coca-Cola), as depicted in table 2.8. 
Let’s try to interpret the numbers of two companies. NVIDIA has a high P/E ratio and
a low PEG ratio. These numbers indicate that NVIDIA is still experiencing massive
growth, and we expect continued earnings growth in the future.
NOTE Investors might also consider whether outstanding PEG ratios are sus-
tainable over multiple years. The holy grail of many investors is companies
that show constant earnings growth over the years and whose further growth
can’t be challenged by competitors.If we look at future earnings, things start to look more promising. NVIDIA had great
past earnings, but future earnings look even better. The P/E GAAP (FWD) brings us
closer to the sector peers. However, we can reason differently than before with the
PEG GAAP (TTM) and PEG Non-GAAP (FWD). First, we must highlight that there has
been a substantial increase in earnings. Projecting these earnings into the future
gives us a ratio—PEG GAAP (TTM)—that beats the sector by 81.27%. We can rea-
son that NVIDIA remains a bargain, considering its P/E ratios have consistently
been higher than those of its peers in the past, and its share price has still
increased significantly.
Table 2.8 Earnings ratios for NVIDIA, Apple, Sempra, Walmart, and Coca-Cola
Company Forward P/E Trailing P/E PEG ratio Price-to-sales Price-to-book Beta
NVIDIA (NVDA) 34.40 45.72 1.76 23.27 41.22 2.122
Apple (AAPL) 24.54 31.76 1.85 7.61 45.10 1.211
Sempra (SRE) 14.95 16.89 2.03 3.76 1.63 0.656
Walmart (WMT) 35.83 41.65 3.72 1.14 9.32 0.693
Coca-Cola (KO) 24.02 28.65 4.41 6.55 11.72 0.46
Data taken from Seeking Alpha on June 8, 2025 ( https:/ /seekingalpha.com )

40 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
In contrast, Coca-Cola’s PEG ratio indicates lower growth potential. This maturity
makes it a perfect candidate for a dividend-paying company, which we’ll explore in
section 2.4.6.
 As shown earlier in section 2.4.1 when discussing liquidity, comparing different
sectors may help us see common knowledge reflected in numbers. Coca-Cola has
been in existence since 1892; its soft drinks are already widely distributed worldwide.
With that, it’s improbable that this company would face an existential crisis. It’s hard
to imagine that a vast percentage of consumers who are used to drinking Coca-Cola
would stop drinking it. NVIDIA is the market leader in a competitive market. In recent
years, the company has gained success after success, and their growth continues as the
market expands significantly (a trend not observed in the soft drinks market). At the
same time, it’s more conceivable than with Coca-Cola that the semiconductor market
could be disrupted by a competitor, making NVIDIA less resilient than Coca-Cola.
Comparing NVIDIA with tech company AMD (trailing PE of 81.81 and PEG ratio of
0.59) would be more interesting, as we could hypothesize that while AMD is overval-
ued compared to NVIDIA, its growth potential is bigger.
2.4.5 Profitability
We calculate profitability  by subtracting expenses from earnings, and we can calculate
profitability ratios. Having data about profit (or loss), we need to understand its rela-
tionship to other parameters, such as assets or equity. In some cases, we may find that
we make a profit, but compared to the amount of money invested, the investment can
still be considered a questionable decision.
 Return on assets (ROA)  is calculated by dividing net income by total assets. It reflects
how effectively the company uses its assets to generate revenue. If Company A
reported $10,000 of net income and owns $100,000 in assets, its ROA is 10%. Every $1
of assets generates $0.10 cents in profits yearly. It takes 10 years to pay off all the asset
investments.
 Return on equity (ROE)  is calculated by dividing net income by shareholder equity. It
indicates how effectively a company compensates its shareholders for their investment.
If Company B reported $10,000 in net income and its shareholders have $2 million in
equity, its ROE is 0.5%. For every $1 of equity that shareholders own, the company gen-
erates $0.05 cents in annual profits.
 We calculate the profit margin  by dividing the net income by the revenue. This met-
ric often varies significantly across different industries. Supermarkets sell a lot, but
their margin per sale is low. 
2.4.6 Dividends
Some new investors may wonder why some companies pay dividends at all. After all,
companies would retain more profits without dividend payments, and more cash
means having more opportunities to invest in the company’s growth.

41 2.4 Metrics and ratios
 Let’s think about Coca-Cola. Almost everyone is familiar with the brand and has
tried its flagship product. Even with the highest imaginable marketing budget, the
company couldn’t make the brand more widely known to the global population, and
it’s challenging to convert those who don’t drink Coca-Cola already into customers.
Even the most eloquent advertisement campaign won’t convert those who have tried it
and who prefer other beverages to fans of Coke.
 If the company didn’t spend its profits due to missing growth opportunities in a
mature market, it would need to hoard them. Consequently, inflation would decrease
these savings. Returning money to investors makes sense, especially because this plan
makes the stock more attractive for investment strategies that rely on returning cash
to their investors, such as retirement funds.
Let’s explore the details of creating passive income with stocks. Passive income inves-
tors buy X shares of a company with higher dividend yields, such as Coca-Cola, on day
Y. For their stock ownership, they get dividends paid in intervals. Dividend payouts are
a provided amount of money per share. This payout is taken from the share price. In
other words, an investor who buys shares before a dividend payout to sell them again
after the dividend payout won’t benefit from such a move.
 Dividend stock investors may also benefit from capital appreciation. Examining
many high-dividend-paying companies, we observe that they also tend to grow in share
price. Let’s look at table 2.9 where we’ve highlighted some growth companies (those
that invest their surplus more in growth) and value companies (those that prefer to
pay dividends rather than invest in further scaling the company). We observe this in
the payout ratio,  which is the percentage of profits distributed as dividends, and the
dividend yield. Someone who buys Apple stock purely for dividend yield picked the
wrong strategy to invest in Apple. The interest rate of treasury bonds, which reflectsWhat if a company starts using its money to invest?
Companies can also use profits to invest in other companies. Coca-Cola is a good
example of such a move, as it owned subsidiaries in the entertainment industry, such
as Coca-Cola Telecommunications. If you’re from the UK, you’ll be familiar with sev-
eral bank divisions, in addition to two of the largest supermarket chains—Tesco and
Sainsbury’s—that both attempted to establish virtual network operators for mobile
services.
Companies with strong brand recognition and financial power have many opportuni-
ties to enter new markets. Whether this strategy is good or not is debatable. Some
may argue that it risks damaging the brand’s reputation and might be hindered by
bureaucracy. Others may think that these companies already have established struc-
tures and can use their capital to expand into other industries as a conglomerate.
History shows that not all spin-offs of successful companies met their expectations,
and they have good reasons to stick to their core business.

42 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
the risk-free rate of capital, is mostly around 5%. Altria (MO) is the only stock in the
table with a dividend yield above the interest rate of Treasury bonds, at 6.89%.
Let’s say 10 years ago, someone bought stock in Coca-Cola. Did they benefit from this
purchase? Or would it have been wiser to invest in a fixed-income asset, such as a trea-
sury bond, at a rate of around 5%? In July 2025, Coca-Cola’s share price was $71.01. As
of July 2015, the share price was $41.25. The stock price grew by more than 5% per
year. Add this capital increase to the dividend, and you’ll see a higher yield than with
safe treasury bonds, which don’t provide capital appreciation.
 An individual who bought Coca-Cola stocks worth $100,000 in 2015 can sell them
10 years later for more than $150,000. As of this writing, Coca-Cola pays $2.04 per
share annually, representing a yield of 2.86%. If we calculated the yield with the price
of 10 years ago, we would get 4.6%. 
NOTE Companies try to increase annual payouts per share over time. As of
June 2025, Coca-Cola pays $2.04 per share in annual dividends. The further
back in time you go, the less money you would have received per share, while,
on average, the share price was lower. It’s often a bad sign for investors if
companies reduce annual payouts per share. Investors can interpret a reduc-
tion as a sign that the company is under pressure and needs to allocate more
resources to sustain its business.
You calculate the dividend yield by dividing the dividend per share by the share
price. Apple has an annual payout per share of 1.04, and the share price is $203.95
(as of June 2025): 1.04 ÷ 203.95 yields a dividend of 0.51%. Many investors will con-
clude that most tech stocks are growth-oriented companies that typically pay only a
small dividend.Table 2.9 Dividends of Apple, Altria, Microsoft, NVIDIA, Sempra, Walmart, and Coca-Cola highlighting
different payout strategies
Company Yield 
FWD %Payout 
ratio % Div growth 
5Y %Consecutive years 
of growth Consecutive years of 
dividend payments
Apple (AAPL) 0.51 14.10 5.24 12 12
Altria (MO) 6.89 77.54 4.00 55 55
Microsoft (MSFT) 0.71 25.04 10.24 20 20
NVIDIA (NVDA) 0.03 1.25 20.11 1 12
Sempra (SRE) 3.36 53.18 4.88 14 26
Walmart (WMT) 0.96 34.03 4.41 51 51
Coca-Cola (KO) 2.86 67.99 4.20 62 62
Data from Seeking Alpha on June 8, 2025 ( https:/ /seekingalpha.com )

43 2.4 Metrics and ratios
NOTE The height of a company’s dividend yield depends on the share price,
and its value can be misleading. As of June 2025, AT&T offers a dividend yield
of 3.95%, but it will only pay $1.11 per share. At the beginning of 2014, Apple
had a share value of approximately $20, similar to AT&T in 2024. Anyone
who purchased 1,000 Apple shares in 2014 for $20,000 not only increased the
value of the shares by more than 10 times but also received a $1,000 dividend
payment each year.
We also add some high-paying dividend examples in table 2.10. Adding the sector and
industry as parameters will help us identify specific industries with higher dividends.
Each company sets its dividend policy according to what it thinks is in the best interest
of its shareholders. Some asset types, such as real estate investment trusts (REITs) , are
required by law to have high payout ratios. If a stock’s payout ratio is low, it’s a good
sign because it can still experience significant growth. The longer a company increases
its dividend payment per year, the more likely it is that this trend will continue.
Another attractive attribute is the dividend growth rate. When researching dividend
yield, it’s also important to consider historical growth.
 Companies have different payment schedules (annual, semi-annual, quarterly,
monthly). A few companies also pay dividends at irregular intervals. If you plan to use
income from dividends for a specific purpose, such as paying for a summer vacation,
carefully consider whether the dividend payment date aligns with your travel plans. 
 One related aspect is stock buybacks. In a buyback, a company purchases its shares
from the market, thereby reducing the number of outstanding shares. Although this
action may sound illogical to a newcomer, remember that the fewer shares there are
on the market, the more valuable the remaining shares will be. A stock buyback is,
therefore, an alternative way to reward existing shareholders without distributingTable 2.10 Looking at a dividend scorecard from data collected via Python
Company Sector Industry Dividend yield Payout ratio
Microsoft (MSFT) Technology Software - Infrastructure 0.71 0.2442
Walmart (WMT) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 0.96 0.3665
NVIDIA (NVDA) Technology Semiconductors 0.03 0.0129
Sempra (SRE) Utilities Utilities - Diversified 3.36 0.4404
Apple (AAPL) Technology Consumer Electronics 0.51 0.1558
Altria (MO) Consumer Defensive Tobacco 6.89 0.6779
VICI Properties (VICI) Real Estate REIT - Diversified 5.50 0.650
Restaurant Brands 
International (RBI.VI) Financial Services Banks - Regional 4.06 0.4297
Data collected using yfinance

44 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
cash. While dividend payments are a recurring commitment—some investors rely on
companies to keep paying the same amount per year or slightly more each year as a
dividend—buybacks aren’t, giving companies more flexibility.
2.4.7 Ownership
A company’s ownership structure isn’t static and provides key insights into its valua-
tion. The total number of a company’s shares held by all of its shareholders is known
as its outstanding shares. A related metric, the float, refines this number by excluding
shares held by insiders and large institutions, representing the shares available for
public trading.
 Just as a central bank can influence a currency’s value by adjusting the money sup-
ply, a public company can alter its share value by changing the number of outstanding
shares. Following are two ways this is done:
Issuing new shares —When a company issues additional stock, it increases the
total supply, thereby diluting the ownership stake of existing shareholders.
Repurchasing shares (buybacks) —Conversely, when a company repurchases its
stock, it reduces the number of outstanding shares, thereby concentrating own-
ership and potentially increasing the value of the remaining shares.
Monitoring these changes is crucial for understanding the dynamics of a company’s
equity.
 Analyzing the trading activity of a company’s executives, often referred to as insider
transactions , can provide valuable insights into their confidence in the business. It’s cru-
cial to monitor whether key figures are buying or selling their own company’s shares.Dividend yields or coupon payments
Some critics argue that using dividends to generate passive income is unwise, pre-
ferring fixed-income assets, such as bonds, as a more reliable source of income.
Many investors are unaware that the amount paid per share to shareholders is also
deducted from the share price. If you own 10 shares of Apple and receive $0.251 per
share in a quarterly payment, you’ll receive $2.51 in cash, excluding taxes. At the
same time, the share price decreases by $0.251 on the payment date. This calcula-
tion makes dividend payments appear to be a zero-sum game compared to bond cou-
pon payments, where the amount received is guaranteed. If you receive 5% interest
on bonds, the value of your bond position isn’t affected.
Taxation can even result in theoretical losses  when dividends are paid. For instance,
nonresident aliens may be subject to a withholding tax of up to 30%  on dividends
from US companies. Based on the numbers just given, when the dividend is paid, the
Apple share price would drop by $0.251. An investor subject to a 30% withholding tax
would lose $0.753 that day. This example highlights the importance of consulting a
tax advisor to understand how taxes can affect your investment returns.

45 2.4 Metrics and ratios
 Table 2.11, for example, details this activity for NVIDIA. The data indicates that
over the past six months, more insiders have sold shares than have purchased them.
As of this writing, NVIDIA’s stock rally is a well-known success story. This success can
explain why many NVIDIA employees might have sold stocks. It might have been just
an opportunity to reap some benefits of success, knowing that the share price might
decrease. If more insiders sell shares than buy them, it can be a warning, but it’s not
yet a single indicator of a problem.
2.4.8 Sustainability
Some investors think beyond potential profits and aim to back companies with solid
social responsibility. Many ethically motivated investors exclude companies with poor
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) ratings, as investing in a company can
also be seen as supporting its practices.Table 2.11 Looking at insider trading
Insider purchases last 6 months Shares Transactions
Purchases 3,914,505.0 17
Sales 2,564,508.0 14
Net shares purchases (sold) 1,349,997.0 31
Total insider shares held 1,057,007,872.0 <NA>
% net shares purchases (sold) 0.001 <NA>
% buy shares 0.004 <NA>
% sell shares 0.002 <NA>
Data from the yfinance library on June 8, 2025
Stock-based compensation and dilution
Many developers have received stock-based compensation (SBC) as part of their
overall package. This incentive allows companies, especially tech firms and start-
ups, to attract and retain talent and keep salary payments lower while reducing the
burn rate , which indicates how fast an unprofitable company consumes its cash
reserves.
While SBC can be a wealth-building tool for employees, it can be a source of dilution
as it increases the number of outstanding shares over time. More shares mean that
each existing share represents a smaller slice of the company.
The smaller the company, the more effect an SBC has. In chapter 12, we’ll examine
private equity and start-ups because everyone investing in start-ups must be aware
of the effect of SBC. 

46 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
 Sustainability data, such as that available on Yahoo Finance, enables this analysis.
These datasets include various metrics, such as flags indicating a company’s involve-
ment in controversial industries, including gambling, animal testing, or tobacco. They
also provide detailed scores across different ESG categories, which are typically rated on
a scale of 0 to 100, where a lower score indicates better performance.
 Table 2.12 shows these ESG ratings for NVIDIA. A key analytical step is to compare
a company to its peers. In this case, the data reveals that NVIDIA’s ESG performance
is better than the average for its peer group (other semiconductor companies), as
shown by its lower overall score.
We can also compare NVIDIA’s score with that of other companies on platforms like
Sustainalytics ( www.sustainalytics.com/esg-ratings ). Investors who care about sustain-
ability can also review the ESG reports that companies regularly publish ( https:/ /
mng.bz/Dwag ). In these pages and reports, companies periodically share their views
on ESG topics and how they address them.
2.5 External assessments
Investment firms, such as Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and JPMorgan Chase, exist
because they can generate profits with the money of other people. Their analysts may
incorporate many of the discussed ratios into algorithms to assess companies. Pro-
grammers may notice a slight resemblance to open source at large software compa-
nies when these investment firms share some of their insights with the public. They
benefit when some of their work is publicly available, allowing them to upsell more
professional services.Table 2.12 Selected sustainability ratings of NVIDIA
Sustainability metrics esgScores
totalEsg 12.46 
environmentScore 2.73 
socialScore 4.08
governanceScore 5.65 
peerEsgScorePerformance min: 8.87, avg: 23.06, max: 40.69
peerGovernancePerformance min: 2.14, avg: 5.32, max: 9.27
peerSocialPerformance min: 2.41, avg: 5.80, max: 10.28
peerEnvironmentPerformance min: 2.6, avg: 7.89, max: 16.95
Data collected from yfinance on June 8, 2025. Each score (E, S, G) is based on a rating from 0 to 100. The total ESG 
score is the sum of all individual scores.

47 2.5 External assessments
 In this section, we examine some of the insights they offer us. In the next chapter,
we’ll also demonstrate how to collect this data using Python libraries. The following
list compares ratings and estimated target prices, two parameters commonly used in
investment analysis:
Ratings —Analysts from reputable investment firms evaluate companies and
assign ratings based on their potential for investment. A relatively new trend is
crowdsourced financial analysis, in which any investor, including those with
minimal experience, can share their investment ideas on a platform.
Estimated target prices —Based on available financial data, some analysts even esti-
mate target prices for individual companies after one year using statistical anal-
ysis and ML. However, as many future events are unforeseeable, these estimates
are often highly inaccurate.
2.5.1 Ratings
Analysts give buy, hold, or sell recommendations to other investors. Table 2.13
shows a list of ratings, which can be found on the investment platform Seeking Alpha
(https:/ /seekingalpha.com/ ). This data was collected on June 8, 2025, and you can
find updated information at the platform. This table shows aggregated ratings of the
following:
SA Analyst Rating —An aggregation of crowdsourced ratings by platform users
Wall Street Rating —An aggregation of ratings by professional Wall Street analysts
Quant Rating —A rating calculated by a Seeking Alpha algorithm
The analysis of Wall Street analysts can also be queried using Python, which is a topic
covered in the next chapter. Table 2.14 presents the results of data collection for
NVIDIA on June 8, 2025.Table 2.13 Company ratings based on the Seeking Alpha platform
Company SA analyst rating Wall Street rating Quant rating
NVIDIA (NVDA) 3.83 4.56 3.38
Pfizer (PFE) 3.18 3.56 3.40
Aeva Technologies (AEVA) 2.50 4.40 4.99
Innoviz (INVZ) — 4.25 3.35
Ouster (OUST) 3.33 5.00 4.50
Luminar Technologies (LAZR) 3.25 2.75 2.63
Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group (SMR) 2.60 4.00 3.47
For the latest numbers, go to https:/ /seekingalpha.com/ .

48 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
The result shows that the ratings decreased over time. Some investors will explore why
analysts are gradually losing confidence. Still, the rating overall is excellent and could
convince some investors to buy shares.
2.5.2 Target prices
Table 2.15 also provides 12-month analyst price targets, which are estimates of a
stock’s future value. The data for Apple, for example, reflects an average high target
of $300 and a low of $164. Analysts typically derive these figures using fundamental
analysis, such as DCF models discussed earlier, although their specific methods are
often proprietary.
 However, investors must approach these targets with caution. Price targets are esti-
mates, not guarantees, and they inherently assume stable market conditions while fail-
ing to account for unpredictable events. As history has repeatedly shown, even the
most astute analysts can be wrong. In the next chapter, we’ll demonstrate how to col-
lect this type of data programmatically using Python.Table 2.14 Ratings for NVIDIA
Period Strong buy Buy Hold Sell Strong sell
0m 12 45 6 1 0
–1m 12 44 6 1 0
–2m 12 44 7 1 0
–3m 11 27 5 0 0
Data taken from the yfinance library on June 8, 2025
Table 2.15 Target prices of selected companies
Company Price ($)Mean 
price ($)Median 
price ($)High 
price ($)Low 
price ($)Recommended 
mean Recommended 
key No. of 
analysts
Apple 
(AAPL) 203.92 228.85 232.5 300.0 170.62 2.1 Buy 40
Microsoft 
(MSFT)470.38 509.11 500.0 650.0 429.86 1.4 Strong buy 50
NVIDIA 
(NVDA) 141.72 172.02 175.0 220.0 100.0 1.44 Strong buy 55
Salesforce 
(CRM) 274.51 354.25 360.0 442.0 225.0 1.7 Buy 52
Data taken from the yfinance library on June 8, 2025

49 2.5 External assessments
Analyst ratings are provided by reputable firms, including Goldman Sachs, Morgan
Stanley, and JPMorgan Chase.
 While target prices are useful, studying the history of rating changes can be even
more insightful for understanding the evolution of market sentiment. Table 2.16
shows an excerpt of this data for NVIDIA, transcribed from Yahoo Finance on
June 8, 2025.
Should we trust the judgment of professional analysts for our decision-making? Critics
view the favorable ratings of junk bonds by investment firms in 2007 as a crucial root
cause of the mortgage crisis. US taxpayers will also remember who had to bail out
large investment firms after it was revealed they had been wrong in their assessments.
There’s no silver bullet to get guaranteed high returns. Financial investment can be
challenging for people who prefer to think in binary terms, such as right and wrong,
or good and evil. Instead, good investors believe in probabilities.Table 2.16 Upgrades and downgrades of ratings of NVIDIA
Action Analyst: rating Date
Maintains Truist Securities: Buy to Buy 5/29/2025
Maintains Raymond James: Strong Buy to Strong Buy 5/29/2025
Maintains Piper Sandler: Overweight to Overweight 5/29/2025
Maintains Mizuho: Outperform to Outperform 5/29/2025
Data from June 8, 2025. Updated data is available at https:/ /finance.yahoo.com/quote/NVDA/analysis .
Treating statements of experts as opinions, not as predictions
At the beginning of 2024, influential newspapers, such as The Economist , predicted
that stock prices would decline that year ( https://mng.bz/YZnQ ). However, looking at
the share prices of some companies, the opposite happened.
Even with all the data in the world, no analyst can predict the future, a fact best illus-
trated by the recent history of high-growth stocks. Many investors deemed companies
such as Tesla, NVIDIA, and Palantir to be overvalued and ripe for a major correction.
Yet, instead of crashing, their share prices often defied these predictions, either con-
tinuing their ascent or entering a prolonged period of consolidation.
This highlights a fundamental principle of investing: success isn’t about being right
every time, but about being right more often than wrong. Because certainty is impos-
sible, investors rely on diversification to manage probabilities and build a portfolio
that can thrive despite inevitable prediction errors.

50 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
Summary
The three accounting documents (income statement, balance sheet, and free
cash flow [FCF]) follow accounting standards that help us compare companies.
Industry classification standards group companies into different sectors (higher
granularity) and industries (lower granularity) to facilitate classification and
identify peers among companies.
Investors may interpret ratios differently depending on the company’s sector
and industry. They often select ratios for their assessment based on their indus-
try knowledge.
While it’s possible to compare companies across different industries, we
obtain the most reliable results through comparisons of companies within the
same industry.
Some metrics help us determine a company’s status independently of its indus-
try, especially those related to solvency, as the question of whether a company
can pay its bills is a universal concern for all companies.
Income statements provide insight into what companies earn during a period.
The balance sheet provides insight into a company’s assets and liabilities. We
can calculate shareholder equity by subtracting the total liabilities from the
total assets.
A FCF statement provides insight into a company’s liquidity and is often the
basis for calculating liquidity ratios.
Liquidity ratios are calculated mainly from the cash flow statement and reflect
a company’s ability to pay bills with its assets. As some assets aren’t liquid,
some companies may have a positive balance sheet but still be unable to pay
their bills.
Debt ratios provide insight into a company’s leverage by comparing its debt and
assets. In some extreme cases, these ratios may indicate a pending bankruptcy.
Earnings ratios measure the company’s profits per share, and we can use them
in various ratio calculations, such as the price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio.
Profitability ratios assess a business’s ability to generate earnings relative to its rev-
enue, operating costs, balance sheet assets, or shareholders’ equity over time.
Dividend ratios indicate a company’s commitment to return money to its share-
holders in small amounts over various periods.
Ownership metrics examine changes in a company’s ownership, including
insider trading, and can be informative for valuing the company.
Sustainability metrics evaluate a company’s commitment to causes beyond
profit-making, encompassing environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
considerations.
We can collect analyst recommendations. However, following the recommenda-
tions of third parties without due diligence is a risky approach.

51 Summary
Ratings are scorecards given by outside organizations to companies. They indi-
cate the potential risks and gains of investing in those companies. Ratings might
contradict each other and don’t guarantee that the companies’ share prices will
rise or fall.
Target prices are forecasts provided by accredited financial analysts of potential
stock prices. These estimates are highly speculative.

52Collecting data