# Chapter 12: Private equity: Investing in start-ups

Chapter 12 examines opportunities to invest in private equity and highlights the main
differences between this type of investment and investing in stocks.
1.2.9 Other assets
Investing involves acquiring assets and monetizing them, either through capital gains
or passive income . We might not always recognize every asset as such. For example, a
patent can be valued and licensed for royalties, but not everyone considers it part of
their assets.
 Commodities are raw materials, such as gold, oil, and wheat, that investors can
trade. Because their value is linked to real-world supply and demand, their prices
often move independently of the stock and bond markets. While investors can gain
exposure through futures contracts or ETFs, they should be aware that these markets
can be very volatile. This volatility is caused by a variety of complex factors, including
geopolitical events, weather conditions, and global economic growth.
 Some investors view real estate as a safe investment, but it comes with challenges.
For one, it’s a highly illiquid asset, meaning that selling a property can be a slow and
tedious process. Additionally, landlords face the risk of difficult tenants who might
damage the property or fail to pay rent.
 An asset is considered non-fungible if it’s unique and can’t be easily replaced by
another identical item. In contrast, fungible assets are interchangeable, which makes
them a good starting point for new investors. This interchangeability allows them to
be traded easily and efficiently. While you can still make a good living from non-fungi-
ble assets, investing in securities simplifies your life for several reasons:
Lower capital requirements —You can buy shares for just a few dollars, whereas
non-fungible assets such as real estate or art may cost millions.
Lower maintenance —Physical objects require secure storage, insurance, and pres-
ervation, resulting in significant overhead and maintenance costs. Securities
don’t have these drawbacks.
Liquidity —Shares can be sold at any time, while owners of non-fungible items
must find a buyer. Converting them into cash at a fair price can take months or
even years.

8 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
Scalability —Investors who find a well-performing company can keep purchasing
shares, whereas investors of non-fungible assets can’t buy assets twice.
For these reasons, this book concentrates on securities and other assets not included
here.
1.2.10 Choosing assets
Before you begin exploring which assets to purchase, consider these four questions
about your investment goals, and answer them as honestly as possible:
How much money do I need to live a happy life?
How much money do I have that I don’t need right now and can use for
investments?
How much risk am I willing to take for possible bigger gains?
How much time am I willing to dedicate to the investment process itself, such as
researching potential investments and monitoring my portfolios?
Besides some universal principles of investing, such as investing only in businesses you
understand, there is no one-size-fits-all strategy. Still, every investor can find an approach
that best suits their expectations and goals. Now that we know the asset types, we can
explore further and examine investment strategies that align with our needs.
1.3 Investment approaches
Having covered the fundamentals of financial assets, we’ll now focus on how to cre-
ate value from them. We can classify methods of monetizing assets into three main
categories:
Gambling —A surprising number of people rely on gut feelings or perceived signs
from the universe when deciding to buy or sell. Even experienced investors can
fall victim to cognitive biases, such as noticing patterns in random events and
believing “no coincidence” has led them to a life-changing investment.
Investing —We’ll avoid gambling-like speculation to focus on more structured
ways to build wealth. Disciplined investing views building wealth as a long-term
goal. It depends on careful analysis and critical thinking, aiming to reduce
impulsive decisions.
Trading —While investing focuses on long-term success, trading centers on capi-
talizing on short-term price fluctuations. Due to its higher frequency and
shorter time horizons, trading carries more risk than long-term investing.
Let’s explore some strategies that can help us become better traders or investors and,
in turn, help us avoid gambling. Figure 1.1 illustrates the entire investment process
and highlights all chapters where relevant topics are discussed in detail.
 We use financial platforms and publicly available information to collect data on
securities. We can generate more insights about the securities using various analytical

9 1.3 Investment approaches
methods, including machine learning and AI. We can then apply these new insights to
our decision-making processes.Nonﬁnancial dataEquity
Crypto
AI Agent
Asset monitorInference
ChartsShares PrivateDebt
Bonds
Derivatives
RAG DBForex CryptoCurrency
ApplicationFunds (ETF, Mutual, Hedge, Venture)
As a collection of assets
Financial data
Fundamentals Technical Sentiments ESG ratings
Algorithmic tradingStrategy / investment
thesisModel context
protocol
(MCP)
Income portfolio
Value portfolio
Growth portfolioBuy
Sell
HoldNet worth
Proﬁt/lossMoving averages
Bollinger Bands
Ichimoku loud CChapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapters 4+5 Chapter 11 Chapter 6Chapter 8 Chapter 9
Chapter 10Chapters 1+12
Risk management
Hedging
Stress tests
Human factor
Nonﬁnancial risk
Portfolio optimizationChapter 7Big data
(earnings call reports,
transcripts, web data,...)
Financial platforms
(Yahoo Finance,
Finviz,...)Nonﬁnancial data
platforms
ML model
LLMSecurities
Data
Platforms
Machine LearningAPI APIAPI
Decision-MakingGenAI
Figure 1.1 A survey of the tools and techniques covered in this book, including pointers to the chapters that 
focus on the relevant domains

10 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
1.3.1 Quantitative research
Quantitative  refers to numbers, counts, and averages that provide information about
what is happening. The goal is to gather as much financial data as possible across many
companies and compare these “factors” that may influence the future development of
share prices. You can analyze a company’s performance from multiple angles. Histori-
cal data shows how performance has changed over time. You can compare the current
performance of numerous companies.
 Thanks to accounting standards, financial data is highly standardized. As we’ll see
in this book, nonfinancial data can also be quantifiable and incorporated into invest-
ment research.
 In chapter 2, we highlight the financial data that could be especially relevant for
quantitative analysis, such as revenues, profit margins, and price-to-earnings (P/E)
ratios. Quantitative research begins with data collection and aggregation.
 In chapter 3, we show how to gather data relevant to investment analysis. We can
use Python libraries designed to provide financial data in a structured format. Alterna-
tively, we can also scrape data from websites.
 Having quantitative data allows us to use a machine learning algorithm to forecast
future price movements based on historical data. Chapter 8 offers a detailed overview
of how machine learning models are generated.
 Technical analysis involves assessing assets by examining statistical trends from
trading activity, such as price changes and volume. Technical analysts use historical
price charts and various indicators to identify patterns and forecast potential future
price movements. For example, figure 1.2 shows a price chart for NVIDIA, which a
technical analyst would analyze to make informed trading decisions.
NVDA
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0Price
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
DateClosing Price
Figure 1.2 The price development of NVIDIA from 2016 to 2025. Notice the sharp rise in recent years; this is a 
typical example of the growth that attracts many traders and investors. Keep in mind that such growth rates are rare.

11 1.3 Investment approaches
While a line chart of share price development is one of the easier charts to create, we
also have charts that calculate indicators to help with deciding when to buy or sell. In
figure 1.3, we present a candlestick chart for NVIDIA for July 2025, which we created
using the code introduced in chapter 10.
1.3.2 Qualitative research
Qualitative  data includes user feedback from a bug report—the context, feelings, and
reasons that explain why the issue is happening. The financial aspects involve the
strength of that company’s brand, the quality of its management, and the risk of a new
competitor disrupting its market.
 Some of the qualitative data can also be converted into quantitative data. Think of
scraping data from earnings reports, conducting sentiment analysis on the transcripts,
and comparing the scores of all earnings calls. A key part of analyzing qualitative data
is the use of GenAI and AI agents, as summarized here:
Generative AI (GenAI) —This is a newer type of AI that can produce new content
and insights. In finance, GenAI is used to summarize large datasets (e.g., earn-
ings reports and news articles), analyze market sentiment from social media,
and even simulate market scenarios to stress-test investment strategies. We dis-
cuss GenAI in chapter 8.
AI agents —These are advanced AI systems designed to perform complex, mul-
tistep tasks independently. An AI agent can be tasked with conducting thor-
ough research on an asset by collecting data from the web, analyzing financial
statements, assessing recent news, and generating a comprehensive report.
This process automates the entire analytical workflow. We dedicate chapter 9
to AI agents.
Figure 1.3 Candlestick 
charts help us evaluate stock 
performance over multiple days. 
Black (or red) shows that a 
stock’s price decreased, while 
white (or green) shows that it 
increased during the day.

12 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
To illustrate these concepts, chapter 4 will examine companies in the autonomous
driving field as a case study for growth investing, while chapter 5 will focus on income
investment strategies. Both chapters will highlight opportunities for programmers to
gather data about various opportunities more efficiently and to develop better meth-
ods for creating scorecards for investability.
1.3.3 Algorithmic trading and asset monitors
While an investor focuses on a company’s long-term health and intrinsic value, a
trader mainly cares about an asset’s price movement and market conditions. This
focus enables traders to employ strategies that are uncommon in traditional invest-
ment portfolios. We can divide trading approaches into two main categories:
Going long (long position) —This is a common strategy that involves buying an
asset with the expectation that its price will rise. This method follows the tradi-
tional “buy low, sell high” principle.
Going short (short selling) —This strategy aims to profit from a decline in an asset’s
price. A trader borrows an asset (e.g., shares of stock), sells it on the open mar-
ket at the current price, and plans to repurchase it later at a lower cost.
With this understanding, let’s examine several key categories of trading. These styles
are characterized by their time frames, methods, and dependence on technology:
Short-term trading —This is a broad category of trading that involves buying and
selling assets over a short period, from minutes to weeks. A trader typically exe-
cutes these trades manually, based on a predetermined strategy. The specific
time frame often determines the name of the trading style:
–Day trading —This style involves opening and closing all trading positions
within the same trading day. A day trader seeks to profit from intraday price
movements and avoids holding any positions overnight.
–Swing trading —This strategy involves holding positions for more than a day
but usually no longer than a few weeks. A swing trader aims to capture larger
price swings or short-term trends that develop over several days.
Automated trading (algorithmic trading) —Traders use algorithms to execute buy
and sell orders based on predefined indicators such as price changes or trading
volatility. Automation enforces disciplined execution of a strategy, removing
emotion from the decision-making process. For example, a day trader could
automate their specific plan. Chapter 11 explains how to identify potential alpha
factors.
High-frequency trading (HFT) —This is an advanced form of automated trading
that operates at breakneck speeds with large volumes of orders. HFT firms use
powerful computers and sophisticated algorithms to capitalize on minute, fleet-
ing price differences or arbitrage opportunities, frequently executing trades in
microseconds. Being faster than competitors is the primary focus of HFT, a field
led by specialized quantitative firms.

13 1.3 Investment approaches
Effective asset management starts with a unified view of all holdings. Chapter 6 lays
the groundwork for this by showing how to gather data from multiple brokers and
exchanges into a single Google Sheet. We’ll use Python to connect to two global bro-
kers, Interactive Brokers and Alpaca. If you aren’t comfortable connecting directly to
brokers, you can use database tables to store their holdings instead.
 Building on that, chapters 8 and 9 explore how to use AI-driven algorithms to ana-
lyze stock performance and identify market trends. This then leads to chapter 11,
which explains the principles of algorithmic trading—techniques that automatically
execute trades when specific parameters or factors are met.
 A key part of any such strategy is backtesting. Like unit testing in software develop-
ment, backtesting assesses an algorithm by testing it against historical market data.
This process illustrates how the strategy would have performed in the past, offering
essential insights into its potential effectiveness before any capital is risked.
1.3.4 Portfolios and investing strategies
We can classify investment styles into three main categories: value, growth, and income
investing. These categories sometimes overlap. One approach is called Growth at a Rea-
sonable Price (GARP) , which combines value and growth investing. Let’s look at these
three types of investing next.
VALUE INVESTING
A value investor seeks to identify companies trading below their intrinsic value. These
opportunities often arise when the market overreacts to temporary setbacks, negative
news, or poor earnings reports, overlooking a company’s long-term potential. To spot
these deals, the investor carefully examines financial data, comparing key metrics and
ratios to identify genuine undervaluation. Chapter 2 covers the basics of applying
value investing.
GROWTH  INVESTING
A growth investor focuses on companies with the potential for rapid expansion, often
innovators in emerging sectors such as quantum computing and autonomous driving.
Success in these complex fields relies on a key principle popularized by legendary
investor Peter Lynch: your personal or professional knowledge of a domain can give
you a strong investment advantage.
 He famously argued that an amateur with specialized insight can often outperform
a professional without it. Chapter 4 is dedicated to this very idea, guiding you on how
to use your unique expertise to identify and analyze growth opportunities.
INCOME  INVESTING
An income investor focuses on assets that provide a consistent stream of passive
income. An income portfolio usually includes dividend-paying stocks, bonds that offer
regular interest payments, or real estate investment trusts (REITs). Chapter 5 centers
on income investments.

14 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
 Table 1.1 compares these three strategies, enabling readers to identify the approach
that best aligns with their risk profile, return goals, and time investment.
Many individuals employ a hybrid approach, carefully combining various methods to
achieve multiple financial goals. This approach may also include trading strategies in
conjunction with the investment strategies mentioned earlier. Often, this blended
method takes the form of a “core and satellite” portfolio:
The core —This is the foundation of the portfolio, focused on long-term invest-
ing. These assets are held with patience, allowing wealth to grow through com-
pounding and enabling primary growth goals to develop over time.
The satellites —Surrounding the core are more minor, more tactical divisions.
Investors can design these satellites for various purposes:
– A portion of the capital may be allocated for short-term trading to capitalize
on market fluctuations actively.
– Another portion can be invested in income-producing assets to generate a
steady stream of passive income, adding stability and cash flow to the overall
financial picture.
– This balanced structure enables individuals to maintain a disciplined, long-
term plan while also capitalizing on short-term opportunities and securing a
steady income.Table 1.1  Comparing growth, value, and income investing
Attribute Growth investing Value investing Income investing
Primary goal Capital appreciation Capital appreciation Regular income
Investor focus Future potential, 
innovationUndervalued “bargains” Consistent cash payouts
Typical company Young, innovative, rapidly 
expandingMature, stable, temporar-
ily unpopularEstablished, predictable, 
high cash flow
Dividends Low or none (profits are 
reinvested)Often pays dividends High and stable divi-
dends key
Key metrics High revenue growth, 
High P/ELow P/E, Low P/B* High dividend yield, 
stable cash flow
Risk profile High Low to moderate Low
Time horizon Long-term Medium to long term Any, but often for immedi-
ate needs
* P/E = price-to-earnings; P/B = price-to-booking. 

15 1.4 Risks and rewards
1.4 Risks and rewards
This book will also examine strategies that support investment and trading decisions.
Hedging  is a risk management tactic used to offset potential losses in an investment. By
taking an opposing position in a related asset, an investor can safeguard their portfo-
lio from adverse price movements. Essentially, hedging is akin to buying insurance; it
involves a tradeoff where you may sacrifice some potential gains to mitigate the risk of
a significant loss. Chapter 7 covers risk management, including hedging strategies.
 Figure 1.4 shows the returns of different assets. Should we simply choose the top
performers and move forward?
Past results don’t guarantee future outcomes. The market is unpredictable, and no set
of tools, techniques, or strategies guarantees success. As explained in chapter 12, start-
ups can return much more than other assets, but they are also the riskiest. As of June
2025, Bitcoin is valued at around $118,000. While an investor buying now might bene-
fit if the price increases from this point, they also face a realistic risk that it could drop
sharply and lose a significant portion of its value.
 Especially in recent years, it has become increasingly clear how fragile the stock
market is and how social media can sometimes have a more significant effect on share
prices than earnings reports. We’ve often seen the unpredictable actions of public fig-
ures causing overnight gains to disappear, only to rebound later.
 Warren Buffett once said, “Be fearful when others are greedy, and greedy when oth-
ers are fearful.” This principle advises caution during a rising bull market, especially
Stock (S&P 500)
Bonds (US Aggregate)
Cryptocurency (Bitcoin)Annual Returns of Stocks, Bonds, and Cryptocurrency (2018-2024)
Figure 1.4 Comparison of returns of stocks, bonds, and cryptocurrency (generated by ChatGPT)

16 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
when experienced investors begin to warn of underlying risks, such as high federal
debt or economic instability. In such times, it’s wise to resist the temptation to invest
aggressively.
1.5 A programmer’s unfair advantage
Forget stereotypes from pop culture and movies. Slick traders don’t run the modern
market in boardrooms; it’s a complex system of data, logic, and algorithms. It’s an
environment where you, as a programmer, have a natural and powerful advantage.
The skills you use every day to build software are the same skills that can create wealth.
1.5.1 You think in systems and data
Your job is to turn raw data into logical decisions. Whether you’re debugging from a
log file or analyzing performance metrics, you follow evidence, not emotion. Investing
is the same. A company’s financial statements are just datasets waiting for analysis.
Stock charts are patterns waiting to be recognized. While others rely on gut feelings,
you can do the following:
Perform fundamental analysis. Similar to debugging a program by inspecting its
core components, you can assess a company’s financial health (income, balance
sheets) to determine its intrinsic value.
Use quantitative tools.  The skills needed to analyze data or run scripts are directly
applicable to backtesting trading strategies and automating your research.
Build a system.  Programming involves developing rule-based systems. This skill is
essential for crafting a disciplined investment plan that steers clear of common
biases, such as panic selling or chasing hype.
1.5.2 Your mindset is built for the market
Beyond technical skills, your mindset has been prepared for the realities of investing.
Here are some mindset traits you can use to your advantage:
Patience and discipline —You understand the frustration of a tough bug and the
satisfaction that comes with finally fixing it. Successful investing is the highest
form of delayed gratification, requiring the same resilience to see a strategy
through to its conclusion.
Abstract thinking —You’re comfortable with abstractions, from APIs to complex
data structures. This helps in understanding intangible assets, such as stocks,
bonds, and derivatives, more easily. You can see the system, not just its parts.
Visionary thinking —You operate at the forefront of technology. You’re not just a
user of emerging trends in AI, virtual reality (VR), or biotech—you’re often a
creator. This domain knowledge provides you with a unique perspective on
which companies are set to shape the future.

17 Summary
1.5.3 Define your parameters
As a programmer, you can align your investment strategy with your life choices. Some
programmers choose a career that offers a high income, allowing them to retire early
with a solid financial plan.
 Other programmers might choose workplace flexibility over a fixed location and
become part of the growing community of digital nomads. Sometimes, the benefit
isn’t more money but lower expenses and taxes.
 The key to investment success is understanding your environment and goals. You
shape your investment philosophy, just as you would define the specs for a project:
How much risk can you handle? How much time will you dedicate? What are your eth-
ical boundaries?
 Answering these questions will help you develop a strong, personal strategy you
can follow, turning your natural advantages as a programmer into real-world results.
Note that this book doesn’t provide financial advice or recommend the purchase of
specific assets. It guides you in using your existing analytical skills to analyze securities,
ultimately supporting your decision-making process.
Summary
An investment is an asset or item acquired to generate income or appreciation.
Assets aren’t restricted to financial products. Each asset follows different rules
and principles to generate value. Nonfinancial assets can be complex for new
investors to trade as they are non-fungible (not interchangeable).
Unlike most other assets, financial assets are fungible, a feature that makes
them significantly easier to trade.
A share is a partial ownership of a publicly listed company. Therefore, every
investor could purchase a majority in publicly traded companies. Stocks are
usually purchased through stockbrokers.
Private equity is ownership in privately held companies that aren’t available on a
public stock exchange.
Derivatives are investments that are created from an underlying asset. A stock
option offers an investor the right to buy or sell a stock under predefined condi-
tions. You can also trade options, which means you can acquire or sell the right
to trade.
Selling stock options can provide you with a small income, but you might face
significant risks in some scenarios.
Dividends are payments made by a company to its shareholders in proportion
to the number of shares they hold. Not every company pays dividends. Coupon
payments, in contrast, are payments received for bonds.
Unlike stocks, bonds are associated with debt. Bondholders don’t own parts of
the organization to which they lend money; instead, they receive interest pay-
ments as compensation for their investment.

18 CHAPTER  1The analytical investor
ETFs are pooled investments that are mostly passively managed and contain
multiple assets. Holding ETFs is generally considered less risky for investors
than holding stocks.
A hedge fund is a riskier investment vehicle that employs more advanced invest-
ment strategies, typically sold to a limited number of accredited investors and
institutions.
Cryptocurrency is an asset that enables people to transfer value without requir-
ing third-party involvement in transactions.
Although some assets are called risk-free, no asset is entirely without risk.
Programmers may possess a range of skills that enable them to make data-
driven investment decisions.
New investors benefit from defining investment goals before exploring invest-
ment strategies, as each strategy requires a different level of investment, risk tol-
erance, and time commitment.
This book doesn’t give financial advice. It aims to teach best practices for using
programming skills and AI to gain deeper insights and make more informed
investment decisions.

19Investment essentials
In chapter 1, we claimed that programmers’ traits can often make these wizards of
bits and bytes into outstanding investors. But traits (and brains) alone won’t do.
Take the following statement that you might find in any financial analysis of a share
price: “With a P/E ratio of over 25, this stock seems overvalued.” For someone new
to investing, sentences like that or dialogs between investors in movies such as Wall
Street  or The Big Short  might sound like a foreign language. In 2003, Eric Evans pub-
lished his book, Domain-Driven Design , which contains principles for creating soft-
ware in unfamiliar domains for software engineers. One cornerstone of these
principles is the use of ubiquitous language. This principle asserts that each domain
has developed its specialized language using terminology exclusive to domain
experts. An essential part of software engineering is learning to understand and
communicate effectively in this language. So, let’s start the next part of our journey
by getting deeper into the domain language of investment.
 Once we understand the domain language, we can easily interpret the previous
P/E ratio statement. A share  is a share of ownership in a company. As a tradableThis chapter covers
Core understanding of the investment domain
Metrics that help us find profitable investments
What to look for in financial reports

20 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
asset, a share may trade at a price below or above its intrinsic value. To assess a stock’s
valuation, we may investigate multiple metrics or ratios related to a company’s per-
formance. The price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio is a key financial metric related to a
company’s earnings.
 Finance is a complex domain; if one universal strategy led to guaranteed incredi-
ble riches in a short time, hedge funds wouldn’t compete for the best performance.
However, intelligent value investors have demonstrated that finding undervalued
stocks, when studying fundamentals, is possible. If you’re solely interested in the code,
feel free to proceed to the next chapter, where we demonstrate how to collect the
ratios and metrics introduced in this chapter using Python.
2.1 Accounting in a nutshell
Think of financial statements as a company’s source code. While they may seem cryp-
tic at first, once you learn to read them, they reveal precisely how a business is per-
forming. In this section, we explore the basics of reading the financial code because
investing without understanding at least the basics of accounting is like trying to cre-
ate a software application with zero programming skills.
 Companies follow global accounting standards. If one company reports numbers
in one way and another company in a different way, we would end up in chaos. One
powerful entity can compel companies to report data in a standardized manner: the
government, which requires these reports as a basis for taxation.
NOTE Just as programmers can misjudge a colleague’s source code at a
glance, investors can misinterpret financial statements. In both cases, context
is crucial, and a seemingly simple number may be misleading without it.
Admitting you were wrong is difficult, but making the initial mistake of judg-
ing code or numbers too quickly is a costly one.
Accounting standards haven’t existed since the beginning of stock exchanges. The
prevailing economic philosophy of laissez-faire capitalism in the roaring twenties
extended to corporate reporting. There were no federal laws compelling companies
to disclose financial information to the public. While the New York Stock Exchange
had some listing requirements, they weren’t rigorously enforced, and there was no
uniform standard for the information that needed to be provided. The stock market
crash of 1929, which led to the Great Depression and caused widespread pain, had
multiple root causes. Missing accounting standards exacerbated the problem, and,
not surprisingly, the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)  were established in
response to the crash.
 These accounting standards establish a stable baseline by mandating a consistent
method for companies to report their financial information. Violating them can be
costly, sometimes even threatening a company’s existence. In addition to GAAP, there’s
a second standard, the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS),  which is used
in the international market. These standards differ in detail, but these differences are

21 2.1 Accounting in a nutshell
irrelevant to a programmer’s book on investments. What counts is that all companies
are required to report their findings in three documents that are the basis for all key
financial metrics that investors discuss:
Income statement —How much revenue a business makes and how much it spends
Balance sheet —What assets a business owns and what it owes
Cashflow statement —How much cash the business generates
We can safely assume that every public company provides these three documents.
Whether it’s Apple, Walmart, Coca-Cola, or a non-US company such as Rolls-Royce or
Deutsche Bank, they similarly calculate revenue and expenses, although the numbers
in the sheets might differ according to the business model. Every company reports all
three statements quarterly.
NOTE As this is a book for programmers, we keep the description of account-
ing statements to a minimum; however, some basic knowledge is necessary to
perform a financial analysis. Sites such as Investopedia ( www.investopedia
.com/ ) can provide you with more detailed information on monetary terms.
2.1.1 Income statement
An income statement shows the company’s performance over a year or a quarter.
Figure 2.1 also shows the relationship of the income statement to other statements.
Income Statement
Revenue
-      Cost of Goods Sold
Gross Proﬁt
-      Operating Expenses
Operating Income
-      Income Tax
Net IncomeCash Flow Statement
Cash Flow Operating Activities
Incl. Net Income
Cash Flow from Investing
Cash Flow from Financing
Net Increase in cash
Balance Sheet
Assets Liabilities
-      Current Assets -      Current Liabilities
-      Long-Term Assets - Long-Term Liabilities
Shareholder Equity (Asset − Liabilities)
Figure 2.1 This illustrates a simplified relationship between the accounting statement and its 
interconnection.

22 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
Investors typically compare a given quarter with the same quarter from previous years,
as many business conditions fluctuate on an annual cycle. Consider how much retail
companies are affected by Christmas sales or the holiday season. Therefore, for some
companies, Q4—the quarter of the Christmas season—might be decisive for their
overall success.
 The main components of an income statement are as follows:
Revenue —Total income from sales or services
Expenses —Costs incurred to generate revenues
Net income —Revenue minus expenses, indicating profit or loss
If I receive $1 today, it’s worth more than $1 I receive in a year. This concept is called
the time value of money . I can invest this dollar today and earn interest on it. At a 5%
annual interest rate, $1 becomes $1.05 in one year. Inflation also affects the time value
of money, meaning I can buy less with one uninvested dollar in a year than I can today,
as consumer prices tend to rise on average.
 Imagine a company that consistently generates the same net income over 10 years.
Over this period, the real value generated decreases each year. Investors typically
expect a successful company to increase both revenue and net income over time.
 Analyzing a company’s accounting statements over time helps in formulating
hypotheses about its performance and operations. Let’s explore this using a simplified
financial model of a fictional consulting firm, which is based on aggregated account-
ing data. This model has the following characteristics, as shown in figure 2.2:
Revenue is generated by selling services.
Research and development (R&D) investments encompass training, personnel
certification, and new skill development.
Service costs are primarily the salaries of employees performing billable work.
We continue to monitor the company’s financial statements over time and are inter-
ested in seeing if these numbers change significantly. Let’s imagine after studying
their latest income statement, we discover that R&D expenses increased enormously.
The company finances this increase in research with foreign capital, as shown in fig-
ure 2.3.
 Just by looking at the increased R&D expenses without any further details, we can
take a guess at what’s going on here to come up with theories and create a bullish
(optimistic) and a bearish (pessimistic) hypothesis:
Bullish hypothesis —They must have acquired new projects that will start soon for
which they train new consultants, or they are preparing to sell new services to
existing customers. The company will see a significant increase in its earnings
soon. If investors panic due to additional foreign capital acquired by the com-
pany to finance further research, causing the share price to drop, this company
is a perfect buying opportunity.

23 2.1 Accounting in a nutshell
Revenue to Expenses Distribution
Revenue (100%)R&D (10%)
Services (70%)
Other Expenses (20%)Income Expenses
Figure 2.2 A simplified model of a consulting company that makes its money on selling services and 
spends most of it on employee salaries
Revenue to Expenses Distribution
Revenue+Foreign Capital (100%)R&D (25%)
Services (58.33%)
Other Expenses (16.67%)Income Expenses
Figure 2.3 Here, the R&D expenses have increased, and the additional expenses are covered with 
foreign capital.

24 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
Bearish hypothesis —The company had to attract foreign capital to continue operat-
ing. Maybe they are in trouble. If their business goes bad, we might not see the
effect right away on their accounting sheets. We need to monitor the next income
statements to see if their income goes down and if they start cutting expenses. If
they plan to roll out new services and fail, they will incur additional debt and may
run into liquidity problems. It may be better not to invest in that company.
Consider an alternative scenario in which the company reduces its spending on ser-
vices and R&D, while the revenue is unaffected. Figure 2.4 outlines this scenario.
This scenario suggests that the company may see little room for growth. Instead of try-
ing to increase profits by selling more, they monetize existing revenues. Financial
experts may examine the interest rate set by the Federal Reserve or the central bank
to determine whether that company’s strategy is tied to an economic cycle. Many com-
panies prefer to invest less when interest rates are high and the economy is in a reces-
sion. But still, all we can do is create hypotheses about what’s happening:
Bullish hypothesis —The company still provides the same number of services for
existing clients for less expense costs, which indicates they do more work for the
same money. Maybe the company became more efficient thanks to AI and auto-
mated its processes. As it creates a surplus, the company might become a divi-
dend-paying stock. This is an opportunity to generate passive income.Revenue to Expenses Distribution
Revenue (100%)R&D (5%)
Services (60%)
Other Expenses (20%)
Surplus (15%)Income Expenses
Figure 2.4 Here, the company reduces spending on research and services.

25 2.1 Accounting in a nutshell
Bearish hypothesis —A company’s value increases if it grows. If the company cuts
down on research, it will likely not grow. Having a surplus is fine, but if we don’t
know what the company is planning to do, it’s better not to invest.
This was a simplified model, used for demonstration purposes, for a type of company
that is relatively easy to model. Consulting companies can be relatively straightforward,
as expenses are often linked to income. Consultants work on client projects. The com-
pany makes a profit by selling consultancy services at a higher price than their salary
expenses. Other companies are far more challenging to model. For example, think of a
conglomerate such as Alphabet, for which you need to consider subsidiaries (e.g.,
Waymo) that operate in multiple domains from advertising to cloud computing.
 Another challenge is that we reduced our model to a minimum of parameters for
demonstration purposes. The reality is more complex. At the same time, if you ana-
lyze concrete companies, you have more resources, such as media reports on the com-
pany and interviews with analysts who know the company well. Data-driven investors
can build models of companies and create their own priorities regarding what they
consider to be essential for a company’s value. The essentials might vary from business
to business as well.
NOTE Companies in different industries operate on vastly different business
models. A tech firm such as Apple spends enormous sums on R&D to create a
few high-revenue products. In contrast, supermarket chain Walmart focuses
on selling a high volume of products from many suppliers. For Walmart,
innovation isn’t about creating new products, but about optimizing storage
and supply chains while maintaining quality service. Therefore, comparing
metrics such as R&D spending between Apple and Walmart would be mis-
leading—it’s like comparing apples and oranges. An investor can achieve a
far more insightful analysis by comparing companies within the same indus-
try, such as evaluating Walmart against direct competitor Costco.
The income statement reveals how much a company earns and how it allocates its
expenses, which helps us evaluate a company’s strategy. To complete our tour of finan-
cial statements and gain a comprehensive picture, we must now determine what the
company already owns. We get this information from the balance sheet.
2.1.2 Balance sheet
The income sheet tells us what a company made in a period by listing the revenue
generated and the expenses. The information that a company already owns or owes
still needs to be added. The essence of a balance sheet can be reduced to this simple
formula:
Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders’ equity
Assets  are what a company owns, liabilities  are what it owes, and shareholder equity  is the
amount shareholders would get paid if all assets were liquidated and the debts were
paid. A company may be in serious trouble when its liabilities exceed its assets.

26 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
 Liquidity  is a metric that tells how easily an asset can be converted to cash. Imagine
a manufacturing company that puts one of its factories, along with all of its machinery,
up for sale. It may take some time to find a potential buyer. Other assets, such as
inventory goods, may have better liquidity.
NOTE Do you think like an economist? Consider everything you own—
computers, cars, or clothing—would you list these items as nonliquid assets?
Or do you count only your financial assets as part of your net value? Thinking
as an economist, you might list all of your belongings as part of your wealth.
Programmers often work on projects to reduce capital expenses (CapEx) for their cli-
ents or employers. Cloud migration may be the best reference for such projects, as
companies decide that they prefer renting over owning hardware with such a move.
Some investors also claim that software companies are popular investments because
they aren’t capital-intensive. Low CapEx is often considered low risk, as it requires less
initial investment, even though operating expenses (OpEx) may be higher.
NOTE Engineers sometimes perceive economic soundness differently than
business administrators. Think of an on-premise platform that solves business
problems with minimal OpEx. While engineers might view the investment as
sound, if costs are reduced permanently and a return on investment is
achieved over time, business administrators may be more cautious. Among
other things, they might argue that higher up-front CapEx may lead to lower
liquidity, and he raises the question of opportunity costs and the real total
cost of ownership.
The balance sheet might differ significantly between industries. Software companies
may have almost no assets listed as inventory, whereas supermarket chains must
maintain a large inventory to quickly supply customers with goods. Additionally,
you’ll find inventory listed under current assets in companies such as NVIDIA,
which sell hardware.
 The balance sheet already indicated that having more liabilities than assets is an
alarm signal. However, there’s another detail to analyze after we understand that the
accounts payable and accounts receivable entries on a balance sheet indicate that we
might have some incoming or outgoing money in our books, but not yet in our posses-
sion. It’s possible that a company can’t pay its bills, even if its books show a positive bal-
ance. A third financial statement—the cash flow statement—can give us more details
on a company’s solvency.
2.1.3 Free cash flow
Obviously, we can’t pay bills with all forms of assets. Free cash flow (FCF)  is the amount
of cash remaining after a company has covered its operational costs and CapEx.
Here’s the simplified formula of FCF:
Free cash flow = Operating cash flow – Capital expenditures

27 2.1 Accounting in a nutshell
Operating cash flow refers to the cash a company generates through its normal busi-
ness operations. More than any other document, this statement reveals whether the
company is financially stable, can afford new investments, and can pay its bills without
incurring additional debt.
Each accounting statement will still contain many unfamiliar terms if you don’t have a
degree in business administration. Explaining each term in this book isn’t possible, so
be sure to look up and research terms as you run across any you’re unsure of.
 As a programmer, you’ve seen code written for web applications, data processing,
or embedded systems, and each domain requires different best practices, depending
on the resources available. This same principle applies to companies. Only some of
the best practices are effective for certain companies. Companies are distinct, and
understanding this difference is crucial if you want to invest in them.
 
 Why cash flow matters
Imagine Eugene owns a prestigious antique car business that purchases, renovates,
and sells these vintage beauties to car enthusiasts. He has invested a lot of money
in a garage and a small factory hall, where he also stores a vast inventory of rare
replacement parts. You’re transported to a different era in the garage when you see
all the Studebakers, Packards, and classic Chevy Impalas. 
One day, Eugene looks at his books and realizes he has run out of cash. He had pre-
viously found a treasure trove. A wealthy collector of old cars had passed away, and
Eugene acquired a vast collection of rare old vehicles from the heirs at a significantly
reduced price. Eugene knows that he can sell all those cars with a huge profit margin,
but buying all these cars required him to use all of his cash reserves, and he must
even take a loan from his local bank.
Some salary and other payments are due soon, so he can only keep his business in
operation by borrowing more money. His local bank, which had already given him the
first loan, is hesitant to give him a second one and is inquiring about securities.
Eugene’s cars and equipment might be worth millions; some clients might even owe
him money. However, he can’t pay the plumber who fixes his restrooms in the shop
by giving away a car or a client’s debt. Therefore, a vehicle in Eugene’s inventory isn’t
a liquid asset.
If Eugene proves that his business outlook is good, he’ll most likely get a loan from
the bank. Still, this example suggests one idea we can explore with algorithms: the
risk that a company may be insolvent.

28 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
2.2 Industry classification
Before discussing financial metrics and ratios, let’s examine the possible sectors and
industries to understand potential differences in how companies generate revenues and
allocate their expenditures. Figure 2.5 outlines a categorization of sectors according to
the Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) of S&P ( www.spglobal.com/spdji/
en/landing/topic/gics/ ), a standard used to categorize companies based on their
business models.
NOTE GICS is one standard among multiple official industry classification
standards. Investors, such as Peter Lynch, have created their own unofficial
systems. Be sure to explore these standards independently, as they offer dif-
ferent perspectives on companies that can help you better understand them.
We use GICS in this book due to its widespread global use and recognition.
GICS groups companies on four levels. The sector (e.g., Utilities) represents the high-
est level, and subindustries are at the most detailed level. Different categorizations of
businesses help to separate them by business models. Each business model may affect
the financial metrics and ratios to watch. Governments regulate specific sectors more
heavily, and changes in law have a greater effect on companies in these sectors than
on others. Other sectors might be more affected by increased interest rates or eco-
nomic cycles than others. 
2.2.1 Influences on GICS sectors
In this chapter, we aim to identify factors that can influence a company, enabling us to
build models later. If we know, for instance, that a sector is influenced by interest
rates, economic cycles, and raw material costs, we can try to build a machine learning
(ML) model that predicts stock prices based on these input factors as features of the
ML model. In table 2.1, we introduce the GICS sectors and the key factors that may
influence the price of an asset in each sector.
Energy Materials IndustrialsConsumer
DiscretionaryConsumer
StaplesHealth
Care FinancialsInformation
TechnologyCommunication
Services UtilitiesReal
Estate
11 Sectors
25 Industry
Groups
74 Industries
163 Sub-
Industries
Figure 2.5 All sectors with icons based on the GICS standard used in many financial platforms (Source: 
www.msci.com/our-solutions/indexes/gics )

29 2.2 Industry classification
Some categorizations of companies might be misleading. Many would consider Ama-
zon, Tesla, and Google to be companies in the information technology sector. GICS
categorizes Amazon and Tesla in the Consumer Discretionary sector, and Google in
the Communication Services sector. Still, when looking up ratios, it makes sense to
look up the company’s sector to add context.Table 2.1 GICS sectors and their influences
Sector What it does Influenced by
Utilities Companies that provide essential ser-
vices such as electricity, water, and 
natural gas Interest rates, energy prices, regulation, 
and bond yields
Consumer Sta-
ples Companies that produce essential prod-
ucts such as food, beverages, and 
household items Interest rates, inflation, consumer confi-
dence, and raw material costs
Consumer 
Discretionary Companies that produce nonessential 
goods and services, including automo-
biles, apparel, and leisure Consumer spending, unemployment 
rates, and disposable income 
Communication 
Services Companies that provide communication 
services, including telecom and media Government regulation, intense competi-
tion, technology changes, general eco-
nomic conditions, consumer and 
business confidence, spending, and 
changes in consumer and business pref-
erences
Real Estate Companies involved in the development, 
management, and operation of real 
properties Demographic changes, interest rates, 
economic cycle, government policies, 
housing demand, and economic growth
Information 
Technology Companies that produce software, hard-
ware, or semiconductor equipment, and 
companies that provide internet or 
related services Innovation, cybersecurity threats, and 
regulatory changes
Energy Companies that play a role in extracting, 
refining, or supplying consumable fuels Oil prices, geopolitical stability, and 
renewable energy trends
Health Care Companies that provide medical ser-
vices, manufacture medical equipment, 
or develop pharmaceuticals Pandemics, regulation, drug pricing, and 
demographic changes
Financials Companies that provide financial ser-
vices, including banking, insurance, and 
investment Interest rates, economic cycles, and reg-
ulatory changes
Industrials Companies that produce goods used in 
construction and manufacturing, includ-
ing machinery and equipmentManufacturing output, trade policies, and 
commodity prices
Materials Companies that provide raw materials 
used in the manufacturing process, 
including metals and chemicals Commodity prices, supply chain stability, 
and environmental regulations

30 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
2.2.2 Sectors and economic cycles
In an economic crisis with unpleasant side effects, such as high unemployment rates
or high inflation, it makes sense that some businesses are more affected than others.
To demonstrate the effect of economic cycles on share prices, let’s pick four suspects—
Microsoft, Coca-Cola, Walmart, and Ford—and check their share prices during the
2008 financial crisis, when the housing market collapsed. For table 2.2, we used an
interval from January 1, 2008, to January 1, 2010.
Even if we only look at the numbers, it’s evident that Ford’s value declined far more
steeply than Walmart’s, falling to just one-tenth of its previous value at its lowest point.
A bar chart accentuates the changes even more clearly in figure 2.6.
 This chart makes sense because Ford and Microsoft produce products that con-
sumers can drop more easily. If resources are scarce, postponing the purchase of
a new car may be a viable option, but choosing not to go to the supermarket, even in a
crisis, isn’t possible; we still have to eat. Let’s examine how various sectors performed
during the 2008 financial crisis.
 One way to improve this exploration is to compare sector indices. A sector index is
a collection of multiple companies within a single sector, which can also be referred to
by their respective tickers. In figure 2.7, we look at XLK (Technology sector), XLP
(Consumer Staples), and XLY (Consumer Discretionary). The graph shows what com-
mon sense has already told us: companies producing goods for everyday needs are less
affected by crises.Investing only in companies whose business you understand
Warren Buffett recommends investing only in businesses that you understand. A
supermarket chain such as Walmart is different from a tech company. If a tech com-
pany launches a successful product, it may be reflected in its yearly results (think of
the effect of the iPhone on Apple’s business). However, the best-selling product of a
supermarket chain won’t have a visible effect on an accounting statement.
Reading accounting statements of a company and understanding what they mean, as
well as being able to interpret changes in numbers, may not make you an accountant,
yet. However, being able to interpret the numbers and connect them to the com-
pany’s business model provides a foundation for making wise investment decisions.
Table 2.2 Highs and lows of selected share prices from 2008 to 2010
Microsoft (MSFT) Coca-Cola (KO) Walmart (WMT) Ford (F)
High 35.95 32.79 21.28 10.37
Low 14.87 18.72 14.37 1.01
Avg. 24.82 25.65 17.60 5.42

31 2.2 Industry classification
Comparison of High, Low, and Avg Values for Companies (Grayscale)
Values
Microsoft (MSFT) Coca-Cola (KO) Walmart (WMT) Ford (F)
Company35.95
14.8724.8232.79
18.7225.65
21.28
14.3717.6
10.37
1.015.4235
30
25
20
15
10
5
0High
Low
Avg
Figure 2.6 Data from the table shown in a bar chart makes the drop in value of some companies more obvious.
Figure 2.7 The effect of the 2008 housing market crisis on selected indices XLK (Technology), XLP (Consumer 
Staples), and XLY (Consumer Discretionary)

32 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
A company’s performance is fundamentally linked to the economic cycle, which con-
sists of four stages: expansion, peak, contraction, and trough. During an economic
expansion, rising employment and disposable income boost spending on nonessential
goods. Conversely, during a contraction, consumers prioritize essentials and cut back
on discretionary items. This dynamic reveals that some companies are highly cyclical ,
with their success directly tied to the health of the economy. In contrast, others are
noncyclical  or defensive , remaining stable during economic downturns. This sensitivity
extends beyond business cycles, as other macroeconomic forces—such as government
fiscal policy, interest rates, inflation, commodity prices, and currency exchange rates—
also affect industries in vastly different ways. 
2.3 Capitalization
As we now understand that companies in different industries and sectors may react
differently to market conditions, we might develop an “invest in too-big-to-fail compa-
nies” investment hypothesis. While smaller companies might perish in a crisis and lose
their invested money permanently, we can bet on big companies that will survive all
crises and consistently grow over the years, on average.
 Before we challenge this idea, let’s first define what larger  or smaller  means in this
context. The number of employees at a company can be a misleading indicator of
size. A more suitable metric for investors to consider is capitalization. In short, capital-
ization  refers to the value that people are willing to pay for the company at the current
time. Investors calculate a public company’s capitalization by multiplying the total
amount of outstanding shares of a stock by the current stock price.
 Although many companies with a small market capitalization (e.g., start-ups and
small and midsize enterprises [SMEs]) are private and so not listed on stock exchanges,
the difference between companies on the stock market can still be vast. We can group
companies as follows (with some slight variations in different markets):
Mega-cap —Market value of $200 billion or more
Large-cap —Market value between $10 billion and $200 billion
Mid-cap —Market value between $2 billion and $10 billion
Small-cap —Market value between $250 million and $2 billion
Micro-cap —Market value of less than $250 million
A mega-cap company’s bankruptcy risk is lower than that of companies with a lower
market capitalization. At the same time, finding tenbaggers —a term coined by Peter
Lynch for an investment that returns 10 times its initial purchase price—is much
more likely with a micro-cap stock. They have far more room to grow.
NOTE Intrinsic value reflects an asset’s true worth, which can be estimated
using various methods, such as discounted cash flow analysis or other funda-
mental valuation techniques. Even with rigorous analysis, every intrinsic value
estimate carries a degree of uncertainty. The greater the gap between an
asset’s market capitalization and its estimated intrinsic value, the larger the
potential investment opportunity.

33 2.4 Metrics and ratios
Mega-cap companies, such as NVIDIA, Apple, or Microsoft, differ significantly from
those with a considerably lower market value. Investors who own shares in mega-cap
companies may sit out crises, as the likelihood of bankruptcy is low. Companies with a
viable business model will eventually return to their earlier, higher share prices. Share-
holders of smaller companies may be more concerned about worst-case scenarios. The
smaller the company, the higher the risk, but also the higher the chance for gains.
Many experienced investors, for this reason, love to explore smaller companies and
mitigate risks by conducting more thorough due diligence and in-depth research.
 If we look back in time and examine the fate of companies with the highest market
capitalization over the decades, we’ll see that some past winners have lost their signifi-
cance or disappeared. Even Jeff Bezos claims that Amazon might fail at some point in
the future ( https:/ /mng.bz/pZR0 ). Trusting that giants on the stock market will always
survive might end up like betting during the Jurassic era that some large reptiles are
too big to go extinct. Instead, the stock market is akin to the survival of the fittest, and
it makes sense to investigate the fundamentals of companies.
2.4 Metrics and ratios
With knowledge of a company’s classification and capitalization, we have a basis to go
on. We might pick companies in a sector we understand and choose companies to
invest in. Now, we need to learn more about a company’s fitness. A metric  is a statement
about a company’s performance. One example is the dividend yield, which indicates
the amount of dividends per share. We get most metrics from the accounting state-
ments. A ratio is a statement about a relationship between two independent  metrics. The
price-to-earnings ratio (P/E) measures the share price relative to the earnings per
share (EPS).
 Understanding financial metrics is much like evaluating software quality. In soft-
ware development, metrics such as code readability are essential; however, a cata-
strophic score in one area—such as a high crash rate—demands immediate action
from team leaders, regardless of how elegant the code may be. Similarly, in finance, a
company might appear strong. Still, a critical red flag from a single ratio, such as an
inability to pay its bills, signals serious trouble that forces management to take action.
 Conversely, just as no single metric can guarantee a high-quality product, a few
good financial ratios alone don’t confirm a company’s health or future success. A
common investment mistake is to fixate on one impressive number while ignoring
potential weaknesses elsewhere. The key in both fields is a holistic evaluation. By ana-
lyzing multiple metrics and comparing them to those of industry peers, we can
develop a strong and reliable indicator of a company’s overall performance.
NOTE It’s impossible to cover all ratios used in the financial industry. There-
fore, this subset of possible ratios might be interesting when assessing poten-
tial investments. Web pages such as the Terms page from FullRatio ( https:/ /
fullratio.com/terms ) give more context to what each ratio could mean for an
industry.

34 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
To assess a company’s overall status, we must consider multiple factors. As we’ll
demonstrate in chapter 3, platforms with stock screeners, such as Finviz, provide an
excellent overview of company data. Let’s examine some ratios for NVIDIA and
Walmart in table 2.3. The Beta column refers to a measure of a stock’s volatility—or
systematic risk—in relation to the overall market.
We find some noteworthy differences in the numbers. Walmart’s revenue is signifi-
cantly higher. However, the supermarket chain also has approximately 60 times the
number of NVIDIA’s employees. Having lots of employees also means high expenses.
A supermarket chain also needs to maintain a lot of infrastructure and inventory.
However, as mentioned already in the section on sectors and economic cycles, during
economic downturns, customers will still visit supermarkets to buy food.
 In contrast, some individuals and companies will delay technology purchases if they
don’t have sufficient funds. A low beta value of a stock—Walmart has a beta of 0.69, and
NVIDIA has a beta of 2.12—reflects its resilience against market risks. We observe con-
siderable differences in expected values across GICS sectors, as well as in other ratios.
2.4.1 Liquidity
In the simplest terms, liquidity  measures a company’s ability to pay bills. If you collect
information on multiple companies in a DataFrame, you might find problematic out-
liers. In this chapter, we explore two ratios: the current ratio and the quick ratio.
 The current ratio  measures a company’s ability to pay its short-term liabilities with its
assets. This is calculated by dividing the current assets by the current liabilities. We can
collect both values from the balance sheet.
 The quick ratio  is more stringent. It only considers assets, such as cash, marketable
securities, and receivables, that the company can use to pay short-term debts today
and omits assets such as inventory. The liquidity ratios as of June 8, 2025, for Walmart,
Altria, NVIDIA, and Salesforce are shown in table 2.4.Table 2.3 Selected ratios of NVIDIA and Walmart
Company Market cap Sales Employees P/E Beta
NVIDIA 3457.97B 148.51B 36,000 45.65 2.12
Walmart 779.85B 685.09B 2,100,000 41.81 0.69 
Data from the Finviz platform on June 8, 2025 (for the latest data, go to https:/ /finviz.com/quote.ashx?t=NVDA&p=d  or 
https:/ /finviz.com/quote.ashx?t=WMT&p=d )
Table 2.4 Liquidity ratios for Walmart, Altria, NVIDIA, and Salesforce
Company Sector Industry Current ratio Quick ratio
Walmart (WMT) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 0.780 0.185
Atria (MO) Consumer Defensive Tobacco 0.571 0.468

35 2.4 Metrics and ratios
The table provides insights about sectors. Technology companies tend to have
higher liquidity ratios, which can also be explained by their business models. If we
consider discount stores such as Walmart, we can imagine the amount of capital
these companies have in inventory or goods still to be sold. Nobody wants to go into
a store and find only a minimum of products on the shelves, as supermarket chains
want to improve their liquidity ratios and only buy new products once the old ones
are out of stock.
 Again, this statement shows that we can’t compare the ratios between different
sectors. Table 2.5 is more interesting for a financial analysis, as it compares Walmart,
Costco, Target, and Dollar Tree, which are peer companies. We can compare the
companies based on these returns and have a basis for discussing which one is per-
forming better.
As we delve into the numbers at the micro level for the same sector, we need to take a
deeper dive into them with a different mindset to make key decisions. Perhaps the
insight from one category alone isn’t enough for an investment decision, but it can
still influence that decision. An investor knowledgeable in discount stores might
examine all of these numbers and deduce that Costco has a better ratio than Walmart. 
NOTE Value investors know what makes businesses in the sectors they under-
stand successful and look for confirmation in numbers. They often spend a
considerable amount of time comparing metrics they have selected based on
their understanding of the business. For value investors, sophisticated score-
cards of carefully chosen metrics and ratios can be key decision-making factors.NVIDIA (NVDA) Technology Semiconductors 3.388 2.857
Salesforce (CRM) Technology Software - Application 1.069 0.899
Data collected from the yfinance library on June 8, 2025
Table 2.5 Liquidity ratios for Walmart, Costco, Target, and Dollar Tree
Company Sector Industry Current ratio Quick ratio
Walmart (WMT) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 0.780 0.185
Costco (COST) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 1.015 0.472
Target (TGT) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 0.935 0.152
Dollar Tree (DLTR) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 1.044 0.122
Data collected using yfinance on June 8, 2025Table 2.4 Liquidity ratios for Walmart, Altria, NVIDIA, and Salesforce  (continued)
Company Sector Industry Current ratio Quick ratio

36 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
2.4.2 Debt
In a financial sense, debt is all liabilities with interest-bearing obligations. The debt-to-
equity (D/E) ratio is calculated by dividing a company’s total liabilities by its total
shareholders’ equity. This ratio is a key indicator of a company’s financial leverage,
showing the proportion of debt used to finance its assets compared to equity. A higher
ratio indicates a greater reliance on debt financing, which can increase financial risk.
Let’s look again at some examples in table 2.6.
This chart highlights the need to look beyond surface-level metrics. While Apple’s
debt-to-equity ratio seems 10 times worse than NVIDIA’s, the number reflects a delib-
erate financial strategy, not necessarily poor health.
 Apple strategically issues highly rated corporate bonds at very low interest rates to
finance its research, development, and other growth initiatives. For investors, this debt
isn’t a red flag if the interest rates are close to or below the rate of inflation. In that sce-
nario, the company is using low-cost leverage as a powerful tool to fund growth, turning
a seemingly poor ratio into a sign of sophisticated capital management.
 The interest coverage ratio, not shown in the table but a key metric to explore in
an analysis focused on debt, is a crucial indicator used to assess a company’s ability to
pay the interest on its outstanding debt easily. It’s calculated by dividing a company’s
Earnings Before Interest and Taxes (EBIT) by its interest expenses for a given period.
A result below 1.0 is a universal red flag, indicating that the company’s current profits
are insufficient to cover its interest obligations, which signals significant financial dis-
tress regardless of the industry.
2.4.3 Earnings
We collect the raw earnings data from the income statements to calculate ratios. The
earnings per share (EPS)  metric mentioned earlier serves as the basis for many key ratios.
This metric measures the company’s profits for each outstanding share. The EPS is
calculated with the following formula:
(Profit – Preferred dividends) ÷ Shares outstanding
In earnings calls, companies inform their shareholders about quarterly results. Com-
panies retrospectively assess past earnings from previous quarters and estimate theirTable 2.6 Liquidity ratios for Apple, Walmart, and NVIDIA
Company Sector Industry Debt-to-equity 
Apple (AAPL) Technology Consumer Electronics 146.994 
Walmart (WMT) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 74.138
NVIDIA (NVDA) Technology Semiconductors 12.267
Data collected using yfinance on June 8, 2025

37 2.4 Metrics and ratios
earnings for the following quarters. Whether the numbers are above or below expec-
tations can affect the stock price.
 Free cash flow per share  is a profitability metric that measures the total amount of FCF
generated by the company attributed to each share over one year. A good ratio of
FCF underlines that a company can expand business operations, pay down debt, or
return capital to shareholders. The formula follows: 
Free cash flow per share = Free cash flow (FCF) ÷ Shares outstanding
FCF is calculated by the following: 
Operating cash flow – CapEx
The earnings ratios are mostly interesting for valuation purposes, as earnings are
often used as a basis to evaluate the company. So, it makes sense to continue there.
2.4.4 Valuation
Suppose a start-up claims to be valued at $100 million. What does this mean? A third
party believes that $100 million could be a fair price for acquiring a specific start-up.
However, if a potential buyer is willing to pay this amount, that’s another story. These
valuations are often rough estimates based on data provided by the start-up. Compa-
nies considering a purchase of that start-up may come up with entirely different num-
bers after a more detailed assessment. In the worst case, buyers aren’t interested in
buying the start-up at all, even close to its valuation.
 Start-up valuation can be tricky. Proper valuation, such as with the discounted cash
flow (DCF) method,  requires sound accounting practices over multiple years. This
demand raises questions: Has the start-up reported enough years with all the thor-
oughness necessary for a sound assessment? What if the third party doing the valua-
tion benefits from giving a high rating? (They might attract other start-ups by giving
high valuations in general.)
 Start-up valuations are often rough estimates of a start-up’s worth, assuming every-
thing goes as planned and there are no hidden problems. According to the efficient
market theory, the share price on a stock exchange reflects all available market infor-
mation, causing the valuation of public companies to be more accurate. We multiply
the stock price by the number of shares outstanding and obtain the company’s market
capitalization . Some investors challenge this assumption and try to use valuation met-
rics to find undervalued companies. We can do the same: let’s learn valuation ratios
quickly and complement our knowledge by comparing ratios using practice examples.
 We observed that EPS is a crucial metric. If an EPS diverges strongly from the pre-
vious report, it’s a strong buy or sell signal for investors.
NOTE The exact formula for EPS also subtracts a metric of preferred divi-
dends from the net income, which can be ignored for this example.

38 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
We’ve defined EPS earlier. We calculate the price for $1 of earnings (price-to-earn-
ings) by dividing the share price by EPS. The P/E ratio is essential for determining
whether a stock is overvalued or undervalued.
 If we take the time to explore the P/E ratios of multiple companies, we’ll soon
learn that they vary significantly. If NVIDIA has a P/E ratio of 47.61 and Pfizer one of
10.43, as of January 31, does this mean NVIDIA is overvalued, and Pfizer is underval-
ued? The reality is not so simple. We need to compare the P/E ratio of a company
with a baseline. One baseline could be the S&P 500 index. At the time of writing, the
P/E ratio of the S&P 500 was around 30. However, this is still vague. The average P/E
ratios vary by sector, so it may be more effective to compare a company’s P/E value
with that of its peers. In this example, the sector median is 25.31, which indicates that
NVIDIA is overvalued. But there’s still one problem. The P/E ratio doesn’t include
projected growth. By dividing the P/E ratio by EPS growth, we get another standard
ratio, the price/earnings-to-growth ratio (PEG). Let’s take a snapshot of NVIDIA’s val-
uation as of June 8, 2025, shown in table 2.7. 
Table 2.7 A snapshot of NVIDIA’s valuation
Sector 
relative gradeNVIDIASector 
median% diff. to 
sectorNVIDIA 
5Y avg.% diff. to 
5Y avg.
P/E Non-GAAP (TTM) D 44.43 22.20 100.10 63.09 29.59
P/E Non-GAAP (FWD) C- 33.14 22.64 46.38 47.38 30.05
P/E GAAP (TTM) C- 45.71 28.17 62.22 83.84 45.49
P/E GAAP (FWD) C 35.04 29.14 20.24 62.08 43.56
PEG GAAP (TTM) B 0.56 0.91 -38,45 — NM
PEG Non-GAAP (FWD) B+ 1.15 1.73 -33.48 1.80 36.21
FWD, forward (future financial performance); TTM, trailing 12 months (most recent 12-month period); NM, nonmeaningful 
value
Data taken from Seeking Alpha on June 8, 2025 (for the latest data, go to https:/ /mng.bz/Gwm8 )
Which story do you want to tell?
In June 2024, NVIDIA became the most valuable company in the world, with a total
valuation of over $3 trillion. The snapshot of NVIDIA shows that it’s up to us to decide
which story to tell with the data.
The P/E ratio, as of January 31, 2025, is calculated using a share price of $124.65,
resulting in a P/E ratio of 47.61. The sector median is 25. In addition, NVIDIA’s P/E
ratio is far above its peers. We could stop here and conclude that it’s unwise to buy
shares in a company where you pay more than double for each earnings compared
to similar companies.

39 2.4 Metrics and ratios
The price-to-sales  ratio reflects the price per $1 of sales. Sales figures are generally con-
sidered relatively reliable, whereas other income statement items, such as earnings,
can be manipulated by various accounting rules. For early-stage companies that aren’t
yet profitable, sales growth, as represented by this metric, can be a good indicator of
future success. The price-to-book  ratio is how much you pay for $1 of equity. It reflects
the market’s valuation of the company’s net assets on its balance sheet and is particu-
larly attractive for capital-intensive companies.
 After this brief introduction to ratios, we can make them more meaningful by look-
ing at some examples. For this, we select two technology companies (Apple and
NVIDIA), one utility company (Sempra), a supermarket chain (Walmart), and a bev-
erages company (Coca-Cola), as depicted in table 2.8. 
Let’s try to interpret the numbers of two companies. NVIDIA has a high P/E ratio and
a low PEG ratio. These numbers indicate that NVIDIA is still experiencing massive
growth, and we expect continued earnings growth in the future.
NOTE Investors might also consider whether outstanding PEG ratios are sus-
tainable over multiple years. The holy grail of many investors is companies
that show constant earnings growth over the years and whose further growth
can’t be challenged by competitors.If we look at future earnings, things start to look more promising. NVIDIA had great
past earnings, but future earnings look even better. The P/E GAAP (FWD) brings us
closer to the sector peers. However, we can reason differently than before with the
PEG GAAP (TTM) and PEG Non-GAAP (FWD). First, we must highlight that there has
been a substantial increase in earnings. Projecting these earnings into the future
gives us a ratio—PEG GAAP (TTM)—that beats the sector by 81.27%. We can rea-
son that NVIDIA remains a bargain, considering its P/E ratios have consistently
been higher than those of its peers in the past, and its share price has still
increased significantly.
Table 2.8 Earnings ratios for NVIDIA, Apple, Sempra, Walmart, and Coca-Cola
Company Forward P/E Trailing P/E PEG ratio Price-to-sales Price-to-book Beta
NVIDIA (NVDA) 34.40 45.72 1.76 23.27 41.22 2.122
Apple (AAPL) 24.54 31.76 1.85 7.61 45.10 1.211
Sempra (SRE) 14.95 16.89 2.03 3.76 1.63 0.656
Walmart (WMT) 35.83 41.65 3.72 1.14 9.32 0.693
Coca-Cola (KO) 24.02 28.65 4.41 6.55 11.72 0.46
Data taken from Seeking Alpha on June 8, 2025 ( https:/ /seekingalpha.com )

40 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
In contrast, Coca-Cola’s PEG ratio indicates lower growth potential. This maturity
makes it a perfect candidate for a dividend-paying company, which we’ll explore in
section 2.4.6.
 As shown earlier in section 2.4.1 when discussing liquidity, comparing different
sectors may help us see common knowledge reflected in numbers. Coca-Cola has
been in existence since 1892; its soft drinks are already widely distributed worldwide.
With that, it’s improbable that this company would face an existential crisis. It’s hard
to imagine that a vast percentage of consumers who are used to drinking Coca-Cola
would stop drinking it. NVIDIA is the market leader in a competitive market. In recent
years, the company has gained success after success, and their growth continues as the
market expands significantly (a trend not observed in the soft drinks market). At the
same time, it’s more conceivable than with Coca-Cola that the semiconductor market
could be disrupted by a competitor, making NVIDIA less resilient than Coca-Cola.
Comparing NVIDIA with tech company AMD (trailing PE of 81.81 and PEG ratio of
0.59) would be more interesting, as we could hypothesize that while AMD is overval-
ued compared to NVIDIA, its growth potential is bigger.
2.4.5 Profitability
We calculate profitability  by subtracting expenses from earnings, and we can calculate
profitability ratios. Having data about profit (or loss), we need to understand its rela-
tionship to other parameters, such as assets or equity. In some cases, we may find that
we make a profit, but compared to the amount of money invested, the investment can
still be considered a questionable decision.
 Return on assets (ROA)  is calculated by dividing net income by total assets. It reflects
how effectively the company uses its assets to generate revenue. If Company A
reported $10,000 of net income and owns $100,000 in assets, its ROA is 10%. Every $1
of assets generates $0.10 cents in profits yearly. It takes 10 years to pay off all the asset
investments.
 Return on equity (ROE)  is calculated by dividing net income by shareholder equity. It
indicates how effectively a company compensates its shareholders for their investment.
If Company B reported $10,000 in net income and its shareholders have $2 million in
equity, its ROE is 0.5%. For every $1 of equity that shareholders own, the company gen-
erates $0.05 cents in annual profits.
 We calculate the profit margin  by dividing the net income by the revenue. This met-
ric often varies significantly across different industries. Supermarkets sell a lot, but
their margin per sale is low. 
2.4.6 Dividends
Some new investors may wonder why some companies pay dividends at all. After all,
companies would retain more profits without dividend payments, and more cash
means having more opportunities to invest in the company’s growth.

41 2.4 Metrics and ratios
 Let’s think about Coca-Cola. Almost everyone is familiar with the brand and has
tried its flagship product. Even with the highest imaginable marketing budget, the
company couldn’t make the brand more widely known to the global population, and
it’s challenging to convert those who don’t drink Coca-Cola already into customers.
Even the most eloquent advertisement campaign won’t convert those who have tried it
and who prefer other beverages to fans of Coke.
 If the company didn’t spend its profits due to missing growth opportunities in a
mature market, it would need to hoard them. Consequently, inflation would decrease
these savings. Returning money to investors makes sense, especially because this plan
makes the stock more attractive for investment strategies that rely on returning cash
to their investors, such as retirement funds.
Let’s explore the details of creating passive income with stocks. Passive income inves-
tors buy X shares of a company with higher dividend yields, such as Coca-Cola, on day
Y. For their stock ownership, they get dividends paid in intervals. Dividend payouts are
a provided amount of money per share. This payout is taken from the share price. In
other words, an investor who buys shares before a dividend payout to sell them again
after the dividend payout won’t benefit from such a move.
 Dividend stock investors may also benefit from capital appreciation. Examining
many high-dividend-paying companies, we observe that they also tend to grow in share
price. Let’s look at table 2.9 where we’ve highlighted some growth companies (those
that invest their surplus more in growth) and value companies (those that prefer to
pay dividends rather than invest in further scaling the company). We observe this in
the payout ratio,  which is the percentage of profits distributed as dividends, and the
dividend yield. Someone who buys Apple stock purely for dividend yield picked the
wrong strategy to invest in Apple. The interest rate of treasury bonds, which reflectsWhat if a company starts using its money to invest?
Companies can also use profits to invest in other companies. Coca-Cola is a good
example of such a move, as it owned subsidiaries in the entertainment industry, such
as Coca-Cola Telecommunications. If you’re from the UK, you’ll be familiar with sev-
eral bank divisions, in addition to two of the largest supermarket chains—Tesco and
Sainsbury’s—that both attempted to establish virtual network operators for mobile
services.
Companies with strong brand recognition and financial power have many opportuni-
ties to enter new markets. Whether this strategy is good or not is debatable. Some
may argue that it risks damaging the brand’s reputation and might be hindered by
bureaucracy. Others may think that these companies already have established struc-
tures and can use their capital to expand into other industries as a conglomerate.
History shows that not all spin-offs of successful companies met their expectations,
and they have good reasons to stick to their core business.

42 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
the risk-free rate of capital, is mostly around 5%. Altria (MO) is the only stock in the
table with a dividend yield above the interest rate of Treasury bonds, at 6.89%.
Let’s say 10 years ago, someone bought stock in Coca-Cola. Did they benefit from this
purchase? Or would it have been wiser to invest in a fixed-income asset, such as a trea-
sury bond, at a rate of around 5%? In July 2025, Coca-Cola’s share price was $71.01. As
of July 2015, the share price was $41.25. The stock price grew by more than 5% per
year. Add this capital increase to the dividend, and you’ll see a higher yield than with
safe treasury bonds, which don’t provide capital appreciation.
 An individual who bought Coca-Cola stocks worth $100,000 in 2015 can sell them
10 years later for more than $150,000. As of this writing, Coca-Cola pays $2.04 per
share annually, representing a yield of 2.86%. If we calculated the yield with the price
of 10 years ago, we would get 4.6%. 
NOTE Companies try to increase annual payouts per share over time. As of
June 2025, Coca-Cola pays $2.04 per share in annual dividends. The further
back in time you go, the less money you would have received per share, while,
on average, the share price was lower. It’s often a bad sign for investors if
companies reduce annual payouts per share. Investors can interpret a reduc-
tion as a sign that the company is under pressure and needs to allocate more
resources to sustain its business.
You calculate the dividend yield by dividing the dividend per share by the share
price. Apple has an annual payout per share of 1.04, and the share price is $203.95
(as of June 2025): 1.04 ÷ 203.95 yields a dividend of 0.51%. Many investors will con-
clude that most tech stocks are growth-oriented companies that typically pay only a
small dividend.Table 2.9 Dividends of Apple, Altria, Microsoft, NVIDIA, Sempra, Walmart, and Coca-Cola highlighting
different payout strategies
Company Yield 
FWD %Payout 
ratio % Div growth 
5Y %Consecutive years 
of growth Consecutive years of 
dividend payments
Apple (AAPL) 0.51 14.10 5.24 12 12
Altria (MO) 6.89 77.54 4.00 55 55
Microsoft (MSFT) 0.71 25.04 10.24 20 20
NVIDIA (NVDA) 0.03 1.25 20.11 1 12
Sempra (SRE) 3.36 53.18 4.88 14 26
Walmart (WMT) 0.96 34.03 4.41 51 51
Coca-Cola (KO) 2.86 67.99 4.20 62 62
Data from Seeking Alpha on June 8, 2025 ( https:/ /seekingalpha.com )

43 2.4 Metrics and ratios
NOTE The height of a company’s dividend yield depends on the share price,
and its value can be misleading. As of June 2025, AT&T offers a dividend yield
of 3.95%, but it will only pay $1.11 per share. At the beginning of 2014, Apple
had a share value of approximately $20, similar to AT&T in 2024. Anyone
who purchased 1,000 Apple shares in 2014 for $20,000 not only increased the
value of the shares by more than 10 times but also received a $1,000 dividend
payment each year.
We also add some high-paying dividend examples in table 2.10. Adding the sector and
industry as parameters will help us identify specific industries with higher dividends.
Each company sets its dividend policy according to what it thinks is in the best interest
of its shareholders. Some asset types, such as real estate investment trusts (REITs) , are
required by law to have high payout ratios. If a stock’s payout ratio is low, it’s a good
sign because it can still experience significant growth. The longer a company increases
its dividend payment per year, the more likely it is that this trend will continue.
Another attractive attribute is the dividend growth rate. When researching dividend
yield, it’s also important to consider historical growth.
 Companies have different payment schedules (annual, semi-annual, quarterly,
monthly). A few companies also pay dividends at irregular intervals. If you plan to use
income from dividends for a specific purpose, such as paying for a summer vacation,
carefully consider whether the dividend payment date aligns with your travel plans. 
 One related aspect is stock buybacks. In a buyback, a company purchases its shares
from the market, thereby reducing the number of outstanding shares. Although this
action may sound illogical to a newcomer, remember that the fewer shares there are
on the market, the more valuable the remaining shares will be. A stock buyback is,
therefore, an alternative way to reward existing shareholders without distributingTable 2.10 Looking at a dividend scorecard from data collected via Python
Company Sector Industry Dividend yield Payout ratio
Microsoft (MSFT) Technology Software - Infrastructure 0.71 0.2442
Walmart (WMT) Consumer Defensive Discount Stores 0.96 0.3665
NVIDIA (NVDA) Technology Semiconductors 0.03 0.0129
Sempra (SRE) Utilities Utilities - Diversified 3.36 0.4404
Apple (AAPL) Technology Consumer Electronics 0.51 0.1558
Altria (MO) Consumer Defensive Tobacco 6.89 0.6779
VICI Properties (VICI) Real Estate REIT - Diversified 5.50 0.650
Restaurant Brands 
International (RBI.VI) Financial Services Banks - Regional 4.06 0.4297
Data collected using yfinance

44 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
cash. While dividend payments are a recurring commitment—some investors rely on
companies to keep paying the same amount per year or slightly more each year as a
dividend—buybacks aren’t, giving companies more flexibility.
2.4.7 Ownership
A company’s ownership structure isn’t static and provides key insights into its valua-
tion. The total number of a company’s shares held by all of its shareholders is known
as its outstanding shares. A related metric, the float, refines this number by excluding
shares held by insiders and large institutions, representing the shares available for
public trading.
 Just as a central bank can influence a currency’s value by adjusting the money sup-
ply, a public company can alter its share value by changing the number of outstanding
shares. Following are two ways this is done:
Issuing new shares —When a company issues additional stock, it increases the
total supply, thereby diluting the ownership stake of existing shareholders.
Repurchasing shares (buybacks) —Conversely, when a company repurchases its
stock, it reduces the number of outstanding shares, thereby concentrating own-
ership and potentially increasing the value of the remaining shares.
Monitoring these changes is crucial for understanding the dynamics of a company’s
equity.
 Analyzing the trading activity of a company’s executives, often referred to as insider
transactions , can provide valuable insights into their confidence in the business. It’s cru-
cial to monitor whether key figures are buying or selling their own company’s shares.Dividend yields or coupon payments
Some critics argue that using dividends to generate passive income is unwise, pre-
ferring fixed-income assets, such as bonds, as a more reliable source of income.
Many investors are unaware that the amount paid per share to shareholders is also
deducted from the share price. If you own 10 shares of Apple and receive $0.251 per
share in a quarterly payment, you’ll receive $2.51 in cash, excluding taxes. At the
same time, the share price decreases by $0.251 on the payment date. This calcula-
tion makes dividend payments appear to be a zero-sum game compared to bond cou-
pon payments, where the amount received is guaranteed. If you receive 5% interest
on bonds, the value of your bond position isn’t affected.
Taxation can even result in theoretical losses  when dividends are paid. For instance,
nonresident aliens may be subject to a withholding tax of up to 30%  on dividends
from US companies. Based on the numbers just given, when the dividend is paid, the
Apple share price would drop by $0.251. An investor subject to a 30% withholding tax
would lose $0.753 that day. This example highlights the importance of consulting a
tax advisor to understand how taxes can affect your investment returns.

45 2.4 Metrics and ratios
 Table 2.11, for example, details this activity for NVIDIA. The data indicates that
over the past six months, more insiders have sold shares than have purchased them.
As of this writing, NVIDIA’s stock rally is a well-known success story. This success can
explain why many NVIDIA employees might have sold stocks. It might have been just
an opportunity to reap some benefits of success, knowing that the share price might
decrease. If more insiders sell shares than buy them, it can be a warning, but it’s not
yet a single indicator of a problem.
2.4.8 Sustainability
Some investors think beyond potential profits and aim to back companies with solid
social responsibility. Many ethically motivated investors exclude companies with poor
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) ratings, as investing in a company can
also be seen as supporting its practices.Table 2.11 Looking at insider trading
Insider purchases last 6 months Shares Transactions
Purchases 3,914,505.0 17
Sales 2,564,508.0 14
Net shares purchases (sold) 1,349,997.0 31
Total insider shares held 1,057,007,872.0 <NA>
% net shares purchases (sold) 0.001 <NA>
% buy shares 0.004 <NA>
% sell shares 0.002 <NA>
Data from the yfinance library on June 8, 2025
Stock-based compensation and dilution
Many developers have received stock-based compensation (SBC) as part of their
overall package. This incentive allows companies, especially tech firms and start-
ups, to attract and retain talent and keep salary payments lower while reducing the
burn rate , which indicates how fast an unprofitable company consumes its cash
reserves.
While SBC can be a wealth-building tool for employees, it can be a source of dilution
as it increases the number of outstanding shares over time. More shares mean that
each existing share represents a smaller slice of the company.
The smaller the company, the more effect an SBC has. In chapter 12, we’ll examine
private equity and start-ups because everyone investing in start-ups must be aware
of the effect of SBC. 

46 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
 Sustainability data, such as that available on Yahoo Finance, enables this analysis.
These datasets include various metrics, such as flags indicating a company’s involve-
ment in controversial industries, including gambling, animal testing, or tobacco. They
also provide detailed scores across different ESG categories, which are typically rated on
a scale of 0 to 100, where a lower score indicates better performance.
 Table 2.12 shows these ESG ratings for NVIDIA. A key analytical step is to compare
a company to its peers. In this case, the data reveals that NVIDIA’s ESG performance
is better than the average for its peer group (other semiconductor companies), as
shown by its lower overall score.
We can also compare NVIDIA’s score with that of other companies on platforms like
Sustainalytics ( www.sustainalytics.com/esg-ratings ). Investors who care about sustain-
ability can also review the ESG reports that companies regularly publish ( https:/ /
mng.bz/Dwag ). In these pages and reports, companies periodically share their views
on ESG topics and how they address them.
2.5 External assessments
Investment firms, such as Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and JPMorgan Chase, exist
because they can generate profits with the money of other people. Their analysts may
incorporate many of the discussed ratios into algorithms to assess companies. Pro-
grammers may notice a slight resemblance to open source at large software compa-
nies when these investment firms share some of their insights with the public. They
benefit when some of their work is publicly available, allowing them to upsell more
professional services.Table 2.12 Selected sustainability ratings of NVIDIA
Sustainability metrics esgScores
totalEsg 12.46 
environmentScore 2.73 
socialScore 4.08
governanceScore 5.65 
peerEsgScorePerformance min: 8.87, avg: 23.06, max: 40.69
peerGovernancePerformance min: 2.14, avg: 5.32, max: 9.27
peerSocialPerformance min: 2.41, avg: 5.80, max: 10.28
peerEnvironmentPerformance min: 2.6, avg: 7.89, max: 16.95
Data collected from yfinance on June 8, 2025. Each score (E, S, G) is based on a rating from 0 to 100. The total ESG 
score is the sum of all individual scores.

47 2.5 External assessments
 In this section, we examine some of the insights they offer us. In the next chapter,
we’ll also demonstrate how to collect this data using Python libraries. The following
list compares ratings and estimated target prices, two parameters commonly used in
investment analysis:
Ratings —Analysts from reputable investment firms evaluate companies and
assign ratings based on their potential for investment. A relatively new trend is
crowdsourced financial analysis, in which any investor, including those with
minimal experience, can share their investment ideas on a platform.
Estimated target prices —Based on available financial data, some analysts even esti-
mate target prices for individual companies after one year using statistical anal-
ysis and ML. However, as many future events are unforeseeable, these estimates
are often highly inaccurate.
2.5.1 Ratings
Analysts give buy, hold, or sell recommendations to other investors. Table 2.13
shows a list of ratings, which can be found on the investment platform Seeking Alpha
(https:/ /seekingalpha.com/ ). This data was collected on June 8, 2025, and you can
find updated information at the platform. This table shows aggregated ratings of the
following:
SA Analyst Rating —An aggregation of crowdsourced ratings by platform users
Wall Street Rating —An aggregation of ratings by professional Wall Street analysts
Quant Rating —A rating calculated by a Seeking Alpha algorithm
The analysis of Wall Street analysts can also be queried using Python, which is a topic
covered in the next chapter. Table 2.14 presents the results of data collection for
NVIDIA on June 8, 2025.Table 2.13 Company ratings based on the Seeking Alpha platform
Company SA analyst rating Wall Street rating Quant rating
NVIDIA (NVDA) 3.83 4.56 3.38
Pfizer (PFE) 3.18 3.56 3.40
Aeva Technologies (AEVA) 2.50 4.40 4.99
Innoviz (INVZ) — 4.25 3.35
Ouster (OUST) 3.33 5.00 4.50
Luminar Technologies (LAZR) 3.25 2.75 2.63
Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group (SMR) 2.60 4.00 3.47
For the latest numbers, go to https:/ /seekingalpha.com/ .

48 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
The result shows that the ratings decreased over time. Some investors will explore why
analysts are gradually losing confidence. Still, the rating overall is excellent and could
convince some investors to buy shares.
2.5.2 Target prices
Table 2.15 also provides 12-month analyst price targets, which are estimates of a
stock’s future value. The data for Apple, for example, reflects an average high target
of $300 and a low of $164. Analysts typically derive these figures using fundamental
analysis, such as DCF models discussed earlier, although their specific methods are
often proprietary.
 However, investors must approach these targets with caution. Price targets are esti-
mates, not guarantees, and they inherently assume stable market conditions while fail-
ing to account for unpredictable events. As history has repeatedly shown, even the
most astute analysts can be wrong. In the next chapter, we’ll demonstrate how to col-
lect this type of data programmatically using Python.Table 2.14 Ratings for NVIDIA
Period Strong buy Buy Hold Sell Strong sell
0m 12 45 6 1 0
–1m 12 44 6 1 0
–2m 12 44 7 1 0
–3m 11 27 5 0 0
Data taken from the yfinance library on June 8, 2025
Table 2.15 Target prices of selected companies
Company Price ($)Mean 
price ($)Median 
price ($)High 
price ($)Low 
price ($)Recommended 
mean Recommended 
key No. of 
analysts
Apple 
(AAPL) 203.92 228.85 232.5 300.0 170.62 2.1 Buy 40
Microsoft 
(MSFT)470.38 509.11 500.0 650.0 429.86 1.4 Strong buy 50
NVIDIA 
(NVDA) 141.72 172.02 175.0 220.0 100.0 1.44 Strong buy 55
Salesforce 
(CRM) 274.51 354.25 360.0 442.0 225.0 1.7 Buy 52
Data taken from the yfinance library on June 8, 2025

49 2.5 External assessments
Analyst ratings are provided by reputable firms, including Goldman Sachs, Morgan
Stanley, and JPMorgan Chase.
 While target prices are useful, studying the history of rating changes can be even
more insightful for understanding the evolution of market sentiment. Table 2.16
shows an excerpt of this data for NVIDIA, transcribed from Yahoo Finance on
June 8, 2025.
Should we trust the judgment of professional analysts for our decision-making? Critics
view the favorable ratings of junk bonds by investment firms in 2007 as a crucial root
cause of the mortgage crisis. US taxpayers will also remember who had to bail out
large investment firms after it was revealed they had been wrong in their assessments.
There’s no silver bullet to get guaranteed high returns. Financial investment can be
challenging for people who prefer to think in binary terms, such as right and wrong,
or good and evil. Instead, good investors believe in probabilities.Table 2.16 Upgrades and downgrades of ratings of NVIDIA
Action Analyst: rating Date
Maintains Truist Securities: Buy to Buy 5/29/2025
Maintains Raymond James: Strong Buy to Strong Buy 5/29/2025
Maintains Piper Sandler: Overweight to Overweight 5/29/2025
Maintains Mizuho: Outperform to Outperform 5/29/2025
Data from June 8, 2025. Updated data is available at https:/ /finance.yahoo.com/quote/NVDA/analysis .
Treating statements of experts as opinions, not as predictions
At the beginning of 2024, influential newspapers, such as The Economist , predicted
that stock prices would decline that year ( https://mng.bz/YZnQ ). However, looking at
the share prices of some companies, the opposite happened.
Even with all the data in the world, no analyst can predict the future, a fact best illus-
trated by the recent history of high-growth stocks. Many investors deemed companies
such as Tesla, NVIDIA, and Palantir to be overvalued and ripe for a major correction.
Yet, instead of crashing, their share prices often defied these predictions, either con-
tinuing their ascent or entering a prolonged period of consolidation.
This highlights a fundamental principle of investing: success isn’t about being right
every time, but about being right more often than wrong. Because certainty is impos-
sible, investors rely on diversification to manage probabilities and build a portfolio
that can thrive despite inevitable prediction errors.

50 CHAPTER  2Investment essentials
Summary
The three accounting documents (income statement, balance sheet, and free
cash flow [FCF]) follow accounting standards that help us compare companies.
Industry classification standards group companies into different sectors (higher
granularity) and industries (lower granularity) to facilitate classification and
identify peers among companies.
Investors may interpret ratios differently depending on the company’s sector
and industry. They often select ratios for their assessment based on their indus-
try knowledge.
While it’s possible to compare companies across different industries, we
obtain the most reliable results through comparisons of companies within the
same industry.
Some metrics help us determine a company’s status independently of its indus-
try, especially those related to solvency, as the question of whether a company
can pay its bills is a universal concern for all companies.
Income statements provide insight into what companies earn during a period.
The balance sheet provides insight into a company’s assets and liabilities. We
can calculate shareholder equity by subtracting the total liabilities from the
total assets.
A FCF statement provides insight into a company’s liquidity and is often the
basis for calculating liquidity ratios.
Liquidity ratios are calculated mainly from the cash flow statement and reflect
a company’s ability to pay bills with its assets. As some assets aren’t liquid,
some companies may have a positive balance sheet but still be unable to pay
their bills.
Debt ratios provide insight into a company’s leverage by comparing its debt and
assets. In some extreme cases, these ratios may indicate a pending bankruptcy.
Earnings ratios measure the company’s profits per share, and we can use them
in various ratio calculations, such as the price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio.
Profitability ratios assess a business’s ability to generate earnings relative to its rev-
enue, operating costs, balance sheet assets, or shareholders’ equity over time.
Dividend ratios indicate a company’s commitment to return money to its share-
holders in small amounts over various periods.
Ownership metrics examine changes in a company’s ownership, including
insider trading, and can be informative for valuing the company.
Sustainability metrics evaluate a company’s commitment to causes beyond
profit-making, encompassing environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
considerations.
We can collect analyst recommendations. However, following the recommenda-
tions of third parties without due diligence is a risky approach.

51 Summary
Ratings are scorecards given by outside organizations to companies. They indi-
cate the potential risks and gains of investing in those companies. Ratings might
contradict each other and don’t guarantee that the companies’ share prices will
rise or fall.
Target prices are forecasts provided by accredited financial analysts of potential
stock prices. These estimates are highly speculative.

52Collecting data
Chapter 2 focused on what we can analyze to make sound investment decisions.
With that knowledge, it’s time to show how to collect and explore data. Some data
analysts claim that financial data is cleaner than data from other domains. Still,
even with superb data, we need to invest time in preparing it for analytical algo-
rithms and determining how to extract insights most efficiently.
 This chapter teaches you how to gather financial data using Python. We’ll focus
on yfinance, a powerful open source library for scraping data from sources such as
Yahoo Finance, Google Finance, and Finviz.
 While yfinance is excellent for our initial data exploration, we’ll also discuss its
limitations and explore more robust, production-ready alternatives. All the libraries
we cover are either free or offer a freemium model.This chapter covers
Data collection from financial platforms
The types of data used for financial assessments
Selecting Python libraries for financial analysis
Comparing free Python libraries and commercial 
libraries
Fundamental and technical analysis using Python

53 3.1 Financial data
 We’ll start by examining the unique characteristics of financial data. Then, you’ll
learn to use these Python libraries to collect it. With this knowledge, you’ll be ready
for the first use case in chapter 4.
3.1 Financial data
Many data projects, independent of a specific domain, often raise data quality issues,
making it difficult to predict whether the provided facts and numbers lead to insights
that enable better investment decisions. One advantage of financial data is that it’s
regularly audited, and financial statements are required to meet predefined account-
ing standards. Whether data analysts receive data from free or paid sources, the infor-
mation in the data represents the information that a company’s accountants have
officially reported.
 This high-quality data is unavailable to analysts working with data in other fields.
Data scientists working with machine data from factories are more likely to face issues
where defective sensors can mismeasure data or multiple unforeseen environmental
conditions might affect results.
 Still, people working with financial data may face different challenges in interpret-
ing data. The purpose of the obligatory accounting statements is to provide insights
about a company’s economic situation. However, different accounting strategies may
conceal corporate problems or exaggerate profits. How accountants present numbers
in detail can lead to varying interpretations of a company’s results. 
 But before we collect the data, let’s try to classify it first. To analyze financial assets,
we can divide the data into three categories:
Fundamental data —Fundamental data doesn’t change regularly within short
time frames. Consider regularly published quarterly financial documents, such
as income statements, balance sheets, or cash flow statements. They are updated
in intervals, such as with quarterly reports. We expect public companies to fol-
low accounting standards, as their reports may be subject to audit. However, the
reported data may still contain accounting tricks that make a company’s bal-
ance sheet appear more favorable.
Technical data —As a prominent example of technical data, share prices of com-
pany stocks change continuously during the open hours of stock exchanges.
Many traders try to predict trends from these price movements. As many people
depend on this data to earn money as day traders, we can also assume that the
data is usually reported correctly. While data delivery speed isn’t crucial for fun-
damental data, traders who focus on making decisions based on technical data
may benefit from receiving data more quickly and executing orders faster.
Besides historical share prices of companies, examples of other technical data
are trading volume and short interest rates.
Nonfinancial data —In the 2010s, big data became a buzzword for all data sources—
primarily in unstructured form—that store information that can be mined to
find hidden insights. We can analyze data from social media to determine the

54 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
frequency of mentions of a stock ticker and to identify whether the conversa-
tions tend to be positive or negative. Machine learning (ML) engineers may use
algorithms to analyze executives’ emotions when presenting their company’s
earnings reports to detect potential discrepancies in their statements.
NOTE AI algorithms that analyze human emotions in video and audio streams
demonstrate a potential future for investment analysis. For instance, by pro-
cessing footage of a company’s general assembly, these AI tools could detect
whether employee morale is more positive or negative than anticipated. Most
people will likely agree that this also raises ethical questions.
Fundamental, technical, and nonfinancial data differ fundamentally (no pun intended).
While fundamental analysis is primarily based on comparing financial data between
companies within an industry to identify good investment opportunities, technical
analysis is used to make quick trading decisions that benefit from bullish or bearish
market trends. The next step is to look at the origins of the data.
Before we process data with Python, let’s explore some financial platforms that pro-
vide data through a user interface (UI). Although we could load everything into
Python data structures right away, it often helps to use these platforms to preselect
what to explore in depth.
3.2 Financial analysis platforms
Many financial analysis platforms help investors make better decisions by providing
insights into various assets. The scope of these platforms can differ significantly: some
focus on a single asset class, such as stocks or cryptocurrencies, while others limit their
coverage to specific geographic regions.
NOTE We’ll focus on stocks in this chapter and address bonds and crypto in
later chapters.
According to various sources, globally, there are between 47,000 and 58,000 publicly
listed companies. Given this vast universe, one of the primary functions of financialAll roads lead to Rome
This chapter introduces many platforms and libraries, although they solve the same
generic problems (providing financial information and interpretations to allow clients
to make better investment decisions). It’s fair to ask whether focusing only on one
library is sufficient.
Different open source and commercial platforms may offer varying quality standards
and perspectives on financial data. One framework might meet the demands of one
group of users, but another framework better suits the needs of others. Investment
decisions can significantly affect our lives; the more diverse sources we have backing
our decision-making, the lower the risk we face.

55 3.2 Financial analysis platforms
platforms is to help users narrow down choices efficiently. This is where stock screen-
ers come in. A stock screener  is a tool that allows investors to filter listed stocks based on
customizable criteria and displays relevant information onscreen to support informed
decision-making.
 Imagine you’re an investor with a strong understanding of software companies.
While you already hold many US stocks, you’re considering diversifying internationally.
To reduce risk, you focus on companies that are “too big to fail”—industry giants with
massive market capitalizations. Your strategy is to identify potential candidates and then
conduct a more in-depth analysis of their software offerings and market opportunities.
 Many financial analysis platforms offer screeners that allow investors to filter stocks
based on specific criteria. While these tools often share similar features, investors typi-
cally choose based on personal preferences. In this book, we demonstrate how to cre-
ate a preselection using the Finviz platform ( https:/ /finviz.com ).
 In the example shown in figure 3.1, we screen for technology companies outside
the United States with a market capitalization of more than $200 billion, matching the
“mega-cap” category. You can access this filter directly at https:/ /mng.bz/0zJW . The
results may vary slightly from those captured in the screenshot on June 16, 2025.
As shown in the figure, stock screeners allow users to filter by various criteria, func-
tioning like data mining tools. Investors can drill down into individual companies to
explore detailed information. For example, clicking on the link for SAP provides
access to the company’s key financials and other relevant data. Figure 3.2 shows SAP’s
fundamentals, illustrating just one example of what can be uncovered during the
screening process. Of course, the level of detail and presentation varies across differ-
ent financial platforms.
 A stock screener is like a landing zone or home base for investors. When individual
investors seek specific information about stocks, the platform might offer advisory
services or a more refined analysis as a paid subscription feature. Table 3.1 categorizes
financial platforms.
Figure 3.1 Finviz ( https:/ /finviz.com ) is one of many financial services platforms that offer a stock screener to 
help users find companies through various filters. In this screenshot, we selected non-US technology companies 
with a market capitalization of more than $200 billion and received three results. 

56 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
We could use libraries for web scraping and collect financial information from these
platforms if they don’t offer an API. However, using a web scraper means cleaning
data and facing the risk of unpredictable errors, so we want to load the data into our
environment using an API. Before doing that, we should address some basics about
how we want to process financial data.Table 3.1 Categorization of financial platforms for developers 
Platform category Examples Summary
Finance pages of 
a search engine 
providerYahoo Finance, Google 
Finance, or MSN 
MoneyThey provide financial data and insights without ask-
ing users to pay for a subscription (except for Yahoo 
Finance, which offers a premium subscription).
In many cases, open source developers create librar-
ies to scrape data from the platforms to provide that 
data to programmers. The yfinance library is a good 
example of such a library.
Financial advisory 
platform for private 
investorsSeeking Alpha, The 
Motley Fool, Morning-
star, Ziggma, Zacks, 
Koyfin, Stock Rover, 
Empower, Simply Wall 
St, TipRanksThey provide insights about financial assets on a 
tiered subscription model.
With yearly subscription packages, typically ranging 
from $10 to $350 for standard plans, you gain 
access to more in-depth insights.
Only a few advisory platforms provide an API to 
programmers.
Financial data 
providers for fintech 
start-upsEODHD, Alpha Van-
tage, OpenBBThey provide financial data through APIs. Most of 
them also offer a freemium version, providing limited 
access to economic data.
Prices for commercial packages, which include more 
data, more requests, and faster access, vary but are 
often in the range of $240 to $1,200 per year.
Commercial products 
for large investment 
firmsBloomberg Terminal, 
Refinitiv, MSCIThese products normally exceed the budget of individ-
ual investors. They provide an immense amount of 
data and insights for analysts and fund managers.
Figure 3.2 Looking at the fundamental data of SAP on Finviz

57 3.4 yfinance
3.3 Data science notebooks
Pythonistas and data scientists have worked with Jupyter, Databricks, and similar plat-
forms that provide notebooks to users. A notebook  is an environment where you can
run code in single cells and use the results from those cells in other cells, providing an
interactive environment for engineers.
 The appendix includes a section explaining how to install the relevant tools neces-
sary for working with data, including Python libraries. However, addressing “applica-
tion versus notebook” in advance makes sense. Many software engineers may consider
themselves app-centric. If they know they can collect and process data, they might also
be tempted to build a UI to display everything to users. In a later chapter, we demon-
strate how to do this using Streamlit; however, this is often not the primary approach
to exploring financial data for personal investment decisions.
 For personal financial research, creating frontends might be an unnecessary over-
head. Each investment assessment is a unique research project that may require
research in different data sources. As the goal of a personal investment decision is to
buy, sell, or hold based on data, numbers in a console are good enough. All pro-
grammers might need are data science notebooks, in which they can write down an
investment hypothesis and start exploring data to prove or disprove their theses.
Occasionally, they might rerun some cells with different data, or they might copy and
adjust them for alternative analyses.
 In this chapter, we’ll introduce libraries and code snippets to analyze some core
investment aspects of companies. In chapter 4, we’ll continue to apply this knowledge
to identify concrete investment opportunities. Until then, become familiar with the
development environment of your choice and become accustomed to working with
data science notebooks. The code presented in this chapter can also be found in the
book’s downloads and the Git repository.
3.4 yfinance
Pick a random book covering financial data exploration with Python or look for rele-
vant code snippets online, and, most likely, you’ll find code that collects data through
the yfinance library. This library is the perfect starting point for exploring financial
data by experimentation.
 The yfinance library enables developers to load a wide range of data from the
Yahoo Finance platform into Python data structures, making yfinance the best choice
for programmers getting started with exploring financial data. We can use yfinance
for technical and fundamental analysis.
NOTE As you know, a stock ticker is a unique company identifier on a stock
exchange. In chapter 2, for example, you saw NVDA for Nvidia, AAPL for
Apple, and so on. For international exchanges, platforms add an acronym for
the stock exchange. So, if we use Yahoo Finance, we find Rolls-Royce listed as
RR.L on the London Stock Exchange (LSE), or Allianz SE as ALV.DE on the

58 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
Frankfurt Stock Exchange. We need to watch out for mismatches, as there is,
for instance, a ticker ALV registered on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE).
Unfortunately, the acronyms to identify stock exchanges may differ between
APIs. We’ll show in a later example that another library, EODHD, uses the
logical LSE as an identifier for the London Stock Exchange.
3.4.1 Fundamental analysis
Programmers can retrieve a company’s accounting data, introduced in chapter 2,
using yfinance and the code snippets shown here. This DataFrame contains all the
information a company provides when reporting this data, such as aggregated sales
figures over time. In this example, we used Microsoft (MSFT is Microsoft’s stock ticker,
a unique identifier for the company on the NASDAQ stock exchange, where Micro-
soft is listed):
import yfinance as yf
microsoft = yf.Ticker('MSFT')
microsoft.income_stmt
microsoft.balance_sheet
microsoft.cash_flow
For each of the fetched properties of the microsoft  object, the returned object is a
DataFrame representing an accounting statement with the reporting dates as columns
and the metric for each report as a row. Table 3.2 shows the output of the DataFrame
returned by the property income_stmt . The properties balance_sheet  and cash_flow
would return data in the same data structure, but with different values representing
the accounting statements.
Table 3.2 Microsoft’s income statement in a DataFrame
2024-06-30 2023-06-30 2022-06-30 2021-06-30
Tax effect of 
unusual items-99918000.0 -2850000.0 43754000.0 180160797.164637
Tax rate for calcs 0.182 0.19 0.131 0.138266
Normalized 
EBITDA133558000000.0 105155000000.0 99905000000.0 83031000000.0
Total unusual 
item-549000000.0 -15000000.0 334000000.0 1303000000.0
Total unusual 
item excluding 
goodwill-549000000.0 -15000000.0 334000000.0 1303000000.0
Net income 
from continuing 
operational net88136000000.0 72361000000.0 72738000000.0 61271000000.0

59 3.4 yfinance
We can access the specific information in financial account statements by referring to
the data and the specific identifier of the information we’re looking for, as shown in
the following:
microsoft.income_stmt["2024-06-30"]["EBITDA"]
Users who explore the content of an object’s attribute can iterate through columns
representing report filing dates. Programmers interested in the quarterly results of
the three account statements can also use the same approach by calling an attribute
with the identifier quarterly_  followed by the identifier of the accounting statement,
as shown here:
microsoft.quarterly_income_stmt
microsoft.quarterly_balance_sheet
microsoft.quarterly_cash_flow
In chapter 2, we introduced several financial ratios. Collecting financial ratios of com-
panies with Python is easy, as most ratios can be obtained through attributes from sim-
ple objects populated using the yfinance functionality. We continue with the object
microsoft . The microsoft.info  property is an object of the type dictionary. Convert-
ing it into a Pandas Series allows us to access the information referenced by the dictio-
nary’s keys as attributes of the newly generated object:
import pandas as pd
info = pd.Series(microsoft.info)
This info  object contains numerous attributes related to corporate information,
including headquarters address and financial ratios, such as the P/E value. When writ-
ing this book, the library offered 132 attributes to explore. The following code returns
the details of what can be queried:
print(', '.join(info.keys()))Reconciled 
depreciation22287000000.0 13861000000.0 14461000000.0 11686000000.0
Reconciled cost 
of revenue74114000000.0 65863000000.0 62650000000.0 52232000000.0
EBITDA 133009000000.0 105140000000.0 100239000000.0 85134000000.0
EBIT 110722000000.0 91279000000.0 85779000000.0 73448000000.0
Source: yfinanceTable 3.2 Microsoft’s income statement in a DataFrame  (continued)
2024-06-30 2023-06-30 2022-06-30 2021-06-30

60 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
Accessing that one attribute is a one-liner. Next, we collect Microsoft’s current share
price:
info.currentPrice
We define a small helper function to collect the company’s ratios. The following snip-
pet returns a DataFrame containing a list of ratios we pass as identifiers: 
import pandas as pd
import yfinance as yf
def collect_ratios(tickers: list, ratios: list):
    rows = []
    
    for ticker in tickers:
        info = yf.Ticker(ticker).info
        row = [ticker] + [info.get(ratio, None) for ratio in ratios]
        rows.append(row)
    return pd.DataFrame(rows, columns=["Ticker"] + ratios)
In chapter 2, we presented various query results in tables. The collect_ratios
method makes it easy to get multiple ratios . In the following code, we collect the cur-
rent and quick ratios of four companies: Walmart ( WMT), Altria ( MO), NVIDIA ( NVDA ),
and Salesforce ( CRM). We also add the sector and industry to the output: 
collect_ratios(["WMT", "MO", "NVDA", "CRM"], ["sector", "industry",
"currentRatio", "quickRatio"])
The output of these methods can be reviewed in chapter 2, as we’ve used this method
to collect all the data for the ratios that have been introduced there. Using this
method, we can collect more ratios and analysis using attributes, such as debtTo-
Equity , forwardPE , trailingPE , pegRatio , priceToSalesTrailing12Months , priceTo-
Book , beta , or recommendations_summary . The book contains a data science notebook
called Ratios, which includes a set of reference commands to generate the results for
the ratios shown in chapter 2. Feel free to explore them and choose companies that
interest you.
 It’s time to discuss some ratios we introduced in chapter 2 that aren’t provided as
attributes. First, we need to collect a ticker. We’ll also collect references to the latest
accounting statements as they are returned to us, in a DataFrame where columns rep-
resent the reporting dates:
import yfinance as yf
company = yf.Ticker("MSFT")
col_latest_inc_stmt = company.income_stmt.columns[0]
col_latest_bs = company.balance_sheet.columns[0]

61 3.4 yfinance
As shown in table 3.3, we can use code to collect the information. Note that we refer-
ence specific financial accounting documents at a particular date, and you may need
to adjust the dates accordingly.
Another interesting fact is the development of ratios over time. Apple has a higher
debt-to-equity (D/E) ratio than its peers, which is likely related to accounting prac-
tices. However, it could be a bad sign if the last value suddenly rises significantly. The
following code indicates that this ratio fluctuates within years (in 2021, 2.16; in 2022,
2.61; in 2023, 1.78; and in 2024, 1.87), and we can conclude that this D/E ratio won’t
prevent us from making an investment decision:
company = yf.Ticker("AAPL")
for i in range(0,4):
    print(f"{company.balance_sheet.iloc[:,i].name}: 
{company.balance_sheet.iloc[:,i]['Total 
Debt']/company.balance_sheet.iloc[:,i]['Stockholders Equity']}")
3.4.2 Technical analysis
We can use yfinance to examine time series data. In the following example, we load
Microsoft’s historical stock data into a DataFrame for one year, as shown in table 3.4.
In the following code, we load the data for one year by executing this query:
import yfinance as yf
historical_data = yf.Ticker("MSFT").history(start="2024-05-08", 
end="2025-05-08 
historical_dataTable 3.3 How to collect specific ratios using the collected object and helper functions
Ratio Code
Return on assets company.income_stmt[col_latest_inc_stmt]["Net 
Income"]/company.balance_sheet[col_latest_bs]["Total 
Assets"] * 100
Return on equity company.income_stmt[col_latest_inc_stmt]["Net 
Income"]/company.balance_sheet[col_latest_bs]["Stockholders 
Equity"] * 100
Profit margin company.income_stmt[col_latest_inc_stmt]["Net 
Income"]/company.income_stmt[col_latest_inc_stmt]["Total 
Revenue"] * 100
Asset turnover ratio company.income_stmt[col_latest_inc_stmt]["Total 
Revenue"]/company.balance_sheet[col_latest_bs]["Total 
Assets"]
Debt-to-equity company.balance_sheet[col_latest_bs]['Total 
Debt']/company.balance_sheet[col_latest_bs] ['Stockholders 
Equity']

62 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
Occasionally, we prefer to have exact time intervals; in the following code, we show
how to collect data for 2023. The source code output here would return the same data
structure as in table 3.4, with different dates and values:
import yfinance as yf
hd_msft_2023 = yf.Ticker("MSFT").history(start="2023-01-01", 
end="2023-12-31")
hd_msft_2023
The everyday use case uses technical data to explore how stock prices evolve: What is
the spread between highs and lows, and how volatile is the stock? The more volatile
the share price has been in the past, the higher the likelihood that it will continue to
be erratic.
NOTE Past performance doesn’t guarantee future results. However, if you
take several stocks with stable past performance and put them in a portfolio,
you can absorb single stocks performing below expectations. Providing risk-
optimized portfolios is often the domain of exchange-traded funds (ETFs).
In chapter 2, we concluded that the share prices of companies from the consumer sta-
ples sector, such as Coca-Cola, are likely more stable. This sector represents goods for
everyday needs, but consumers will also purchase during crises. If we compare Coca-
Cola with a start-up, we can see this difference in the numbers. Let’s load the required
data and compare Coca-Cola with NuScale ( SMR), a company focusing on building
small modular reactors. We also add Apple ( AAPL ) to the portfolio to diversify our
baseline with a third company:
import yfinance as yf
hist_prices_2023 = yf.Tickers(["AAPL", "SMR", "KO"]).history
(start= "2023-01-01", end= "2023-12-31")
The share prices of different stocks don’t give us a basis for comparing stocks. Com-
pany A might be traded at $1,000 per share, and Company B at $10. The price is just aTable 3.4 Microsoft’s historical price data showing open, high, low, and close prices, as well as trading
volume
DateOpen price 
($)High price 
($)Low price 
($)Close price 
($)Volume
2025-05-07 00:00:00-04:00 433.05 437.32 430.32 432.56 23,295,300
2025-05-06 00:00:00-04:00 431.41 436.93 430.38 432.52 15,104,200
2025-05-05 00:00:00-04:00 432.08 438.69 431.32 435.37 20,136,100
2025-05-02 00:00:00-04:00 430.95 438.63 429.20 434.48 30,757,400
2025-05-01 00:00:00-04:00 430.32 436.19 424.12 424.62 58,938,100
Source: yfinance data from June 8, 2025

63 3.4 yfinance
number without the number of shares outstanding. Companies with high share prices
often consider a share split to reduce the cost of purchasing a single share. If Com-
pany A decided to split the shares in a 1:10 ratio, and you held 1 share, after the split,
you would have 10 shares of stock with a share price of $100. Therefore, we need to set
a starting date for our comparison and assume the price of each company starts at
100%, from which we track the price changes in percentage terms.
 NuScale’s share price could have been better in 2023. We’ll plot the share prices as
a percentage over time to illustrate this. The following code extracts the closing prices
and creates a DataFrame with the percentage changes for each ticker at the beginning
of the period (you may need to install the Matplotlib library):
def plot_closing_prices(data):
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    close_prices = data["Close"]
    price_change_in_percentage = (close_prices / close_prices.iloc[0] * 100)
    price_change_in_percentage.plot(figsize = (12,8), fontsize = 12)
    plt.ylabel("Percentage")
    plt.title(f"Price Chart", fontsize = 15)
    plt.show()
By calling this method with the DataFrame as a parameter, such as by plot_closing_
prices(hist_prices) , we can generate a plot, as shown in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3 The share price development of Apple (AAPL), Coca-Cola (KO), and NuScale (SMR)

64 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
If you looked purely at 2023, you might be tempted to say that it would be wise to
invest in Apple and short sell NuScale. However, if you look at the results of 2024, in
which the share price of NuScale soared, this would have been a disastrous decision.
Figure 3.4 shows the results if we picked the stock starting from November 22 and one
year back. We collect the data using the stock tickers as identifiers and then call the
method to plot the graph:
import yfinance as yf
hd_nvda_smr_aapl_1yr = yf.Tickers(["AAPL", "SMR", "KO"]).history
(start= "2023-11-22", end= "2024-11-22")
plot_closing_prices(hd_nvda_smr_aapl_1yr)
In chapter 4, we’ll explore more details on how to identify other companies, such as
NuScale, that can grow stronger than the market. Let’s begin by exploring the market
returns. We have the closing price of a share and can compare it with the previous
day’s price. With that, we can calculate daily returns:
simple_returns = hist_prices_24 ["Close"].pct_change
(fill_method=None).dropna()
simple_returns
Figure 3.4 The share price development of Apple (AAPL), Coca-Cola (KO) and NuScale (SMR) in 2024

65 3.4 yfinance
Returns calculated this way are called simple returns . A second method for calculating
returns is using logarithmic returns . Instead of subtracting the end price from the start-
ing price, we use log functions:
import numpy as np
log_rets = hist_prices_24["Close"].apply(lambda x: np.log(x / 
x.shift())).dropna()
log_rets
Logarithmic returns have found broad application in calculating returns compared to
simple returns, which we would obtain if we simply subtracted the previous day’s clos-
ing price from the current day’s closing price. Logarithmic returns differ in that they
measure the continuous compounded rate of returns, which is more beneficial for sta-
tistical analysis. We can also plot the returns in a histogram to discover how often we
had outliers (see figure 3.5 for the results):
log_rets_2023 = hist_prices_2023["Close"].apply(lambda x: np.log(x / 
x.shift())).dropna()
log_rets_2023.hist(bins=35, figsize=(10, 6))
Figure 3.5 The histogram of the returns for Apple (AAPL), Coca-Cola (KO), and NuScale (SMR)

66 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
To finalize our primer on technical analysis, let’s look at three standard metrics:
mean, standard deviation, and variance. Again, we use a snippet here to visualize the
differences between these statistical methods (see the results in table 3.5):
summary = log_rets_2023.agg(["mean", "std", "var"]).T
summary.columns = ["Mean", "Std", "Var"]
summary
The mean  is the average stock price over the given period, representing the “central”
value of the dataset. Variance  measures how far each price deviates from the mean in
squared units. The standard deviation  is the square root of the variance, bringing the
measure back to the same units as the prices. 
 The data shows that NuScale exhibits significant fluctuations. However, someone
who in 2023 made a short-term bet on Coca-Cola would have been disappointed as
well. These metrics already give us an idea about the performance of stocks. In later
chapters, we’ll delve into more detail and demonstrate how to determine if stocks in a
portfolio correlate. 
3.4.3 Limitations of yfinance
Digging into the source code of the yfinance code on GitHub, we see that it uses web
scraping frameworks, such as Beautiful Soup. On the landing page, the author intro-
duces this library as a wrapper for Yahoo’s internal API, highlighting that Yahoo
doesn’t maintain the yfinance library. For developers who rely on getting valid results,
this scenario poses a risk. Yahoo is unlikely to inform the maintainers of an open
source product that scrapes its data about upcoming changes. In the worst case, Yahoo
might even decide, at some point, to implement anti-scraping methods to restrict
access to its financial data at any time.
 As shown in figure 3.6, sustainability data wasn’t supported with a version of yfin-
ance in the middle of 2024. Programmers who wanted to incorporate sustainability
data into their analysis would have to use a different library.
 The good news is that with the latest version of yfinance, this problem disap-
peared. Still, yfinance depends on Yahoo’s benevolence, so it’s essential to know alter-
native products.Table 3.5 Statistics for Apple, Coca-Cola, and NuScale
Company mean std var
Coca-Cola -0.035349 0.134959 0.018214
Apple 0.442217 0.199222 0.039690
NuScale -1.149094 0.799615 0.639385
Source: yfinance 2023 data

67 3.5 Commercial libraries
3.5 Commercial libraries
For many personal investment assessments, yfinance is just fine. While commercial
libraries primarily target companies seeking to develop their financial products, there
are still compelling reasons for private investors to collaborate with these libraries.
 The freemium model of commercial libraries encompasses certain aspects of anal-
ysis for personal use. If, for instance, the limitation of a free plan is that some data
arrives delayed or you have a limited quota of API calls, you might still run some algo-
rithms on stocks in your portfolio. In this book, we primarily use yfinance, but in some
examples later, we’ll use some of these commercial libraries in their freemium ver-
sions, where it makes sense.
NOTE Commercial libraries require you to create API keys. In the appendix,
we show a general approach to working with API keys.
Before we explore commercial libraries, let’s see how the ideal data provision works.
Scraping data from a UI, as in yfinance, adds risks and overhead. The moment the UI
structure changes, we may need to adjust our code to scrape the platform. One risk
that users of yfinance face is that Yahoo could change its policy to allow an open
source library to scrape its data. While we can transition as private investors to a differ-
ent library, some of us prefer not to make that effort and are ready to pay a small sum
for a commercial product, especially if it helps us generate better returns.
 The root for technical data is the exchange that lists the stocks we’re interested in.
As we have many exchanges, various entities provide data from different sources.
Don’t forget that we also have international exchanges, in addition to US exchanges,
and collect data from all over the world. Each of these exchanges may provide differ-
ent APIs and standards. We need to dedicate some effort to maintaining the data col-
lection process if we aim to build a commercial library that provides data from all
exchanges.
 
Figure 3.6 Initial limitations of yfinance with sustainability data. Note that this problem is gone with newer 
versions.


68 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
Fundamental data is extracted from accounting statements; the best source is to load
data from those entities where the data is filed. This information should be available
to the public anyway. Let’s examine figure 3.7, which illustrates a reference process.
Data providers collect data from exchanges and government agencies. While account-
ing statements are filed quarterly, share prices change frequently during an exchange’s
opening times, so data from exchanges is likely a streaming source.
NOTE We can integrate generative AI (GenAI) platforms into our source code,
submit prompts, and interpret results using frameworks such as LangChain.
Large language models (LLMs) and AI agents will eventually transform the way
we analyze investments. For now, being able to collect data to obtain reproduc-
ible results deterministically is a use case that GenAI hasn’t yet replaced.Financial providers and their data providers
Yahoo Finance statistics ( https:/ /mng.bz/z2Dg ) confirm that Yahoo Finance uses
data providers such as Refinitiv, Edgar Online, and Morningstar to collect information.
The provider EODHD ( https://eodhd.com/ ) claims in its FAQ that it collects data through
direct contracts with various exchanges. They also collect fundamental data from finan-
cial news providers, corporate websites, and annual reports, with direct extraction from
www.sec.gov  for the US and www.sedarplus.ca/landingpage/  for Canada.
UserAPI Financial Data
ProviderRegulator
Exchange 1
Exchange 2Fundamentals
Technicals
Technicals
... more exchangesAPIAPI
API
Figure 3.7 In a slightly simplified way, users can collect data from financial data providers, who 
collect technical data from one or more exchanges per country and one regulator per country.

69 3.5 Commercial libraries
Many companies provide financial data to consumers. Some, such as Refinitiv and
Morgan Stanley, are focused on business-to-business (B2B) companies. In this book,
we focus on four providers that may be of interest to start-ups, as listed in table 3.6.
3.5.1 Finviz
Finviz is a popular financial platform best known for its feature-rich stock screener
on the platform’s webpage, as shown in figure 3.8. The major downside of this plat-
form is that it only provides data for companies listed on US exchanges. Because
Finviz is popular among investors and often featured in finance training videos, it
still makes sense to introduce the API to users who plan to invest only in the United
States and appreciate the stock screener’s richness. However, we won’t use this API
for samples in the book.Table 3.6 APIs and their packages
Platform Packages
Finviz Elite subscription costs $24.96 per month.
EODHD Packages range from $0 to $199.00 per month.
Alpha Vantage Packages range from $0 to $249.99 per month.
OpenBB Pricing isn’t disclosed.
Figure 3.8 Finviz stock screener home page showing various tickers

70 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
Finviz offers a paid subscription called Finviz Elite, which offers an API. You can set up
an authentication token to parse the screener, as shown in figure 3.9.
After generating a token, we can access stock data. In this example, we can use the fol-
lowing code to access Finviz and export data to a CSV file. We use a REST API to col-
lect information about the stock. It exports all data based on predefined filters,
allowing us to collect fundamental data. Note that to execute the following code, you
need to define a variable token that contains your access token. This token is required
for multiple requests to collect data from Finviz:
import requests
URL = f"https://elite.finviz.com/export.ashx?[allYourFilters]&auth={token}"
response = requests.get(URL)
open("export.csv", "wb").write(response.content)
The commercial Finviz API also lets users collect data for the portfolios they create on
the platform. Figure 3.10 shows a sample portfolio in Finviz. A portfolio is a list of
stocks a user tracks to which they can add the number of shares they own. With that,
you can quickly run a personalized portfolio analysis if you’ve already tracked your
portfolio on Finviz.
 A unique ID identifies every user portfolio. Using the paid Finviz API, users can
collect data via the following URL by passing the portfolio ID as a variable:
https://elite.finviz.com/portfolio_export.ashx?
pid={pid}&o=price&auth={token}
Python Package Index (PyPI) lists alternative and free libraries that scrape Finviz data
without using Finviz’s paid service. These libraries follow the same strategy as yfin-
ance: They scrape data from the web and return data in Pandas DataFrames. These
Figure 3.9 Finviz screen that explains how to use the API

71 3.5 Commercial libraries
libraries also share the same risks as yfinance. If the financial platform deploys anti-
scraping methods, the libraries become unusable.
NOTE Finviz users might observe that stocks of companies with a headquar-
ters outside the United States are displayed, even though Finviz only supports
US stock markets. For example, users may be able to explore a Danish company
that produces weight loss drugs (Novo Nordisk), but they don’t see a large
windmill producer from Denmark (Ørsted A/S). The reason is American
Depositary Receipts (ADRs), which mirror a stock from a foreign exchange to
the US exchange. However, this vehicle has downsides, including dividend
custody fees and other risks.
The paid Finviz API may be a suitable alternative for investors who primarily use US
stock exchanges and want to avoid potential long-term risks associated with incompat-
ibilities with open source libraries. Still, we must continue our search, as we need a
library that covers a wide range of stock exchanges.
3.5.2 EODHD
Finviz and yfinance, the libraries we’ve explored so far, attract users with powerful UIs
that provide stock screening functionality and add libraries to collect data as an addi-
tional feature. EODHD, in contrast, is a platform where data provision is the primary
business model.
 EODHD offers a freemium model that provides historical data from the previous
year. It’s limited to 20 API calls per day, which may be helpful to private investors who
run analyses on their data infrequently. The paid subscription helps programmers
build a product that expects many API calls from clients, as their pricing data includes
features such as 100,000 API calls per day or 1,000 API requests per minute.
Figure 3.10 Example portfolio with Finviz containing assets associated with climate change

72 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
 The first part of the following code is self-explanatory. We instantiate a client
object using an API key as a parameter that identifies us:
from eodhd import APIClient
client = APIClient(api_key)
The platform then determines whether we’re authorized to use specific features based
on our subscription model (see the appendix for more information on API keys). The
biggest challenge with the Finviz library is that it only supported US exchanges. Let’s
confirm that we aren’t limited in such a way using EODHD. We run code to collect the
number of exchanges and obtain 77 exchanges connected to this platform, as shown
in table 3.7:
client.get_exchanges()
With 77 exchanges, we can build a product that caters to the international market.
Let’s load some historical data from Rolls-Royce on the LSE and display the results in
table 3.8.
resp = client.get_eod_historical_stock_market_data(symbol = 'RR.LSE',
 period='d', from_date = '2024-06-01', to_date = '2024-06-17', order='a')
df = pd.DataFrame(resp)
df Table 3.7 A query that returns 77 possible exchanges for EODHD
Name Code OperatingMIC Country Currency CountryISO02 CountryISO03
0 USA Stocks US XNAS, XNYS, 
OTCMUS USD US US
1 London Stock 
ExchangeLSE XLON UK GBP GB GBR
2 Toronto 
ExchangeTO XTSE Canada CAD CA CAN
3 TSX Venture 
ExchangeV XTSX Canada CAD CA CAN
4 NEO Exchange NEO NEOE Canada CAD CA CAN
Source: Data is from the DataFrame.
Table 3.8 EODHD showing the data for Rolls-Royce
Date Open High Low Close Adjusted close Volume
2024-06-03 459.30000000 468.10000000 458.60000000 460.90000000 460.90000000 51,917,078
2024-06-04 460.20000000 462.70000000 448.00000000 448.00000000 448.00000000 31,952,811

73 3.5 Commercial libraries
Comparing the results of this DataFrame with the yfinance DataFrame reveals that
both have a similar column structure. If we’re willing to pay for EODHD as a data pro-
vider, we would eliminate these limitations and be able to switch from yfinance to
EODHD without having to rewrite a lot of code, as the interfaces are similar.
3.5.3 Alpha Vantage
Like EODHD, Alpha Vantage’s primary business model is to provide financial data
via an API. The provider offers a free package and advanced services through a paid
subscription.
 Let’s collect some time series data. In this example, we load data from Apple. As
with EODHD, we need a key that authenticates us. We’ll get access to more data if we
upgrade our key with a paid subscription:
from alpha_vantage.timeseries import TimeSeries
import pandas as pd
symbol = 'AAPL'
ts = TimeSeries(key)
data, meta_data = ts.get_daily(symbol=symbol)
df = pd.DataFrame(data)
df
The result is again a DataFrame, as shown in table 3.9. However, the columns and rows
are displayed transposed by default in EODHD and yfinance.2024-06-05 450.70000000 458.00000000 448.80000000 453.30000000 453.30000000 19,116,760
2024-06-06 458.00000000 463.10000000 450.50000000 458.20000000 458.20000000 19,410,820
2024-06-07 458.20000000 462.30000000 451.00000000 456.90000000 456.90000000 15,420,780
Source: London Stock Exchange
Table 3.9 The results of querying data from Alpha Vantage (inverted compared to yfinance or EODHD)
Type 2025-06-06 2025-06-05 2025-06-04 2025-06-03 2025-06-02 2025-05-30 2025-05-29 2025-05-28
Open 203.0000 203.5000 202.9100 201.3500 200.2800 199.3700 203.5750 200.5900
High 205.7000 204.7500 206.2400 203.7700 202.1300 201.9600 203.8100 202.7300
Low 202.0500 200.1500 202.1000 200.9550 200.1200 196.7800 198.5100 199.9000
Close 203.9200 200.6300 202.8200 203.2700 201.7000 200.8500 199.9500 200.4200
Volume 46,607,693 55,221,235 43,603,985 46,381,567 35,423,294 70,819,942 51,477,938 45,339,678
Source: yfinance Table 3.8 EODHD showing the data for Rolls-Royce  (continued)
Date Open High Low Close Adjusted close Volume

74 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
L u c k i l y ,  t r a n s f o r m i n g  t o  t h e  s t y l e  o f  y f i n a n c e  a n d  E O D H D  r e q u i r e s  o n l y  o n e  c o m -
mand, df.T , and the results are shown in table 3.10.
There’s one hidden limitation. Many platforms return two different datasets for
the closing price: the adjusted close and the close price. The adjusted close price
returns data is adjusted for stock splits and dividend payouts. The good news is
that we can obtain the adjusted close price using an alternative method. However,
this method is part of a premium service. Calling the following method without a
subscription would only return a message that tells us to subscribe to a premium
service:
data, meta_data = ts.get_daily_adjusted(symbol, outputsize='full')
The free package includes another feature that may be of interest to programmers.
The following code collects news sentiments through the REST API from Alpha Van-
tage and stores them in a DataFrame. For this code example, we use the ticker SMR,
which we used earlier to represent the stock of NuScale Power, a nuclear energy com-
pany that builds Small Modular Reactors (SMRs). Figure 3.11 shows the output of the
following query:
import requests
import pandas as pd
ticker = 'SMR'
url = f'https://www.alphavantage.co/query?
function=NEWS_SENTIMENT&tickers={ticker}&apikey={key}'
r = requests.get(url)
data = r.json()['feed']
df = pd.DataFrame.from_dict(data)
dfTable 3.10 Data from Alpha Vantage after a transpose operation to match the structure of yfinance
and EODHD
Date Open High Low Close Volume
2025-06-06 203.0000 205.7000 202.0500 203.9200 46,607,693
2025-06-05 203.5000 203.5000 200.1500 200.6300 55,221,235
2025-06-04 202.9100 206.2400 202.1000 202.8200 43,603,985
Source: yfinance

75 3.5 Commercial libraries
3.5.4 OpenBB
OpenBB integrates various asset classes beyond stocks. However, first, let’s demon-
strate how to collect data using methods similar to those employed by other libraries.
Using two lines, we collect technical data on a stock:
from openbb import obb
obb.equity.price.historical("NVDA").to_df().head()
As shown in table 3.11, our output is like that of other libraries that load technical
data for stocks.
NOTE At the time of writing this book, the OpenBB library didn’t yet support
the latest available Python version (3.13). Users who want to explore this
library can use Python version 3.12.
Let’s focus on this API’s differentiator. The following code shows how to integrate
multiple data providers into this API. We can work with various providers in theory,
which increases our possibilities by allowing us to switch from one provider to another
without requiring any code changes:
obb.equity.price.historical("NVDA", provider="yfinance").to_df().head()Table 3.11 Retrieving technical data through OpenBB
Date Open High Low Close Volume
2023-06-26 42.460999 42.76400 40.099998 40.632000 594,322,000
2023-06-27 40.799000 41.93999 40.448002 41.875999 4,621,750,000
2023-06-28 40.660000 41.845001 40.518002 41.117001 582,639,000
2023-06-29 41.557999 41.599998 40.599998 40.821999 380,514,000
2023-06-30 41.680000 42.549999 41.500999 42.301998 501,148,000
Source: OpenBB
Figure 3.11 The sentiment analysis results for the nuclear energy company NuScale

76 CHAPTER  3Collecting data
But this doesn’t end here. So far, we’ve been focused on stock information, but as we
learned in chapter 1, the financial universe consists of many assets. Let’s look at the
following self-explanatory snippets:
obb.currency.price.historical("USDGBP").to_df().head()
obb.fixedincome.government.treasury_rates(
start_date="2024-01-02").to_df().dropna()
obb.crypto.price.historical("SOLUSD").to_df().tail()
Using this library, we also get access to other assets. OpenBB might be the best library
for programmers who want to explore markets other than stocks; they could choose
this library.
3.6 Other libraries
The Awesome Quant GitHub page at https:/ /github.com/wilsonfreitas/awesome-quant
provides a comprehensive list of alternatives for collecting financial data. However,
rewriting the code can be time-consuming if we choose libraries and later find out
that they don’t meet our expectations.
 One parameter to see if the library meets today’s standards is the day of its last
update. The PyPi web page is a commonly used repository for Python libraries and
provides this information. All we need to do is look at the library’s page, as shown with
yfinance here: https:/ /pypi.org/project/yfinance/ . We can see regular releases in the
PyPI release History page. 
 Another source of information is a library’s GitHub repository, where the library’s
source code is hosted. We can look for the dates of the most recent commits. Follow-
ing is the link to the yfinance repository: https:/ /github.com/ranaroussi/yfinance .
 One rule of thumb is to use a library that has been updated within the past year.
New Python versions are being released, and financial platforms are changing their
interfaces. At some point, a library may become incompatible if nobody is left to main-
tain it. For that reason, we want libraries with multiple contributors. We should also
compare libraries by the number of stars and forks and select more popular libraries,
as this indicates a substantial likelihood of attracting new contributors.
 We aim to filter the existing library repository to identify further possible limita-
tions. Let’s set some further criteria:
Some libraries require system-specific software and may only support specific
operating systems. We want libraries that run on most platforms.
Some APIs are designed specifically for stock exchanges in a single country. We
look for libraries that support as many stock exchanges as possible.
Although English is the default language for most projects, we may encounter
projects that use a different documentation language. We want to exclude these
projects.

77 Summary
For this book, we’ll focus as much as possible on yfinance. It’s the best-known API
for investment analysis, and you’ll find tons of snippets and advice to extend the
code you write.
Summary
We can categorize data into three groups: fundamental, technical, and non-
financial.
Data science notebooks are ideal for analyzing individual stocks, as their inter-
active nature allows you to explore data and discover insights rapidly.
Fundamental analysis involves examining financial reports and ratios.
Technical analysis involves analyzing asset prices to inform sound investment
decisions.
Nonfinancial analysis encompasses all data unrelated to technical and fundamen-
tal analysis and may, for instance, include sentiment analysis about a company.
Different libraries offer different advantages and have other constraints. It’s
good to know more than one library to load financial data.
yfinance is the best library for beginners experimenting with financial data
because it’s free and provides stock data from numerous exchanges (both US
and non-US) for fundamental and technical analysis. 
Using the yfinance library for professional financial products is risky because
Yahoo doesn’t officially support it. Any changes to the Yahoo Finance platform
can cause the library to break without warning.
To build a commercial product using financial data, you need libraries that
offer a paid subscription and provide service guarantees. EODHD, Finviz, Alpha
Vantage, and OpenBB are candidates that could be explored further.
Finviz provides an API on a paid subscription basis and supports only stocks
listed on US exchanges. It can be a good option for investors who plan to invest
only in the US market.
EODHD is a commercial data provider that offers a free version with limited
API calls, supporting many exchanges. If you have a limited number of daily
calls, use the free EODHD version.
Alpha Vantage is a commercial data provider with a limited free version. One
challenge with the free API is that it doesn’t provide adjusted close prices.
Alpha Vantage allows you to collect news sentiments through its library, making
it unique among similar libraries.
O p e n B B  i s  a  c o m m e r c i a l  d a t a  p r o v i d e r  t h a t  o f f e r s  a c c e s s  t o  a  w i d e  r a n g e  o f
assets beyond stocks, including bonds, cryptocurrencies, and foreign exchange
markets. Use this library if you’re interested in more generic investment strate-
gies and aren’t limited to investing in stocks.

78Growth portfolios
This chapter explores the process of building an asset portfolio designed to outper-
form the market. Finding these winners, or alphas as they are often called, is the
holy grail of investing. A stock picker who consistently is just slightly more right
than wrong may have already gained the Midas touch.
 Many investors distinguish between gambling and investing when making
decisions about trading assets. We’re excited about potential investment ideas
that could make us wealthy. And as these dreams of joining the Warren Buffett
club are overly pleasant, we tend to downplay doubts that threaten to undermine
this endearing feeling of getting rich soon. Gambling begins when we rely more onThis chapter covers
Using an investment thesis to predict growth 
companies
Creating a portfolio that reflects an investment 
thesis
Finding specific assets that reflect your thesis 
for your portfolio
Taking the required risks to pursue potential 
gains

79 4.1 Investment thesis
feelings than on critical thinking when making investment decisions. With only a little
research, we find suitable candidates for investments. The tricky part is conducting
the required deep research to identify those candidates for an investment that truly
yields a return.
 I first learned how important a well-considered strategy can be at the age of 10 in
chess club. As I had started playing chess earlier than my peers, I was more skilled at see-
ing combinations, such as forks, to capture my opponents’ pieces, which allowed me to
win most of my games. My chess teacher saw me moving around and waiting for my
opponent to make a mistake. He took me aside and told me: “If you just rely on some-
one else to make a mistake to win, you’ll lose against better players. You need a strategy
to win a game. Even a bad plan is better than no plan.” He turned out to be right. Better
players with a strategy roasted me on the chessboard. I quickly learned an indispensable
principle of learning that can also be applied in investing: research, plan, execute,
reflect, and adjust. With that strategy, learning from mistakes and coming out stronger is
a necessary part of achieving long-term success. Let’s explore how we can invest with a
plan. We begin with a case study for a specific domain, and then we extract the lessons
learned from that case study to create a generic approach to researching investments.
4.1 Investment thesis
An investment thesis  is a researched theory about a stock’s predicted performance. We
face many possible scenarios. Some share prices have performed poorly, and we con-
sider them undervalued, betting on a turnaround. Other stocks may provide a solid
income through steadily growing dividends, and we believe this trend will continue.
And, of course, we might also bet against companies and short-sell assets that we con-
sider overvalued. In this chapter, we aim to showcase one of these many possible sce-
narios, focusing on companies poised for growth and expansion.
 Creators of an investment thesis must be able to defend their reasoning and allow,
or even better, invite others to challenge their ideas. The more unbiased experts who
peer-review the thesis, the better. Let’s start this investigation with the idea that we’ll
refine until we identify a group of assets to purchase. One essential aspect of buying
assets is defining goals to understand from the start and having a guideline for hold-
ing or selling the asset in the future.
NOTE The chapter’s focus is to outline a process for finding stocks, not to
promote a specific set of stocks for you to purchase. You may continue to con-
duct your own extended research based on insights from this chapter. What
remains crucial is that you only invest in businesses you understand.
4.1.1 Starting with an idea
Chapter 2, section 2.2, covering industry classification, outlines how businesses can
vary significantly from one another. Different business models pose different chal-
lenges, and if you don’t know what can go wrong in a specific domain, you risk a lot by
investing in it.

80 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
 The Dunning-Kruger effect is a cognitive bias where people with low ability in a
specific area tend to overestimate their competence, while those with high ability tend
to underestimate theirs. When we encounter individuals who are new to a field we’ve
already mastered, the consequences of that bias often become apparent to us. We
often see the extent of misery when inexperienced persons take bold actions, and we
frequently can predict where they fail and when. But how can we guarantee that we’re
not victims of the Dunning-Kruger effect ourselves when we pick companies to invest
in? The brutal answer is that we can never be 100% sure if we’re too confident. Unde-
tected overconfidence is likely one of the primary root causes why so many people fail
in their investment journey.
 Still, we can reduce the chances of being overconfident by picking a field where
there is evidence that we understand one thing or two, such as through a track record
of work experience. That’s why I picked an industry I’ve worked in for a while.
 Evolving an idea into a thesis is accomplished through iterative steps. We must
gradually refine our thoughts and challenge them until we arrive at a refined concept.
The path to a good thesis can be rocky. We sometimes must accept that we’re on the
wrong path and need to start over. This process is similar to designing a product for a
start-up: occasionally, you need to pivot, but eventually, you learn what the market
needs. One advantage of an investor over a founder is that an investor doesn’t have to
bring all the entrepreneurial skills to the table to launch products or services.
 When it becomes clear that we can defend our theory about a profitable business
through reasoning and receive feedback, we’re on to something. We can start calling
our idea a thesis.
Investment idea: Autonomous driving will pay off
The market for autonomous driving is growing. Numerous statistics support this
assertion: at some point in the future, self-driving vehicles will become the norm, not
the exception. Waymo claims to deliver 250,000 driverless robotaxi rides a week
(https://waymo.com/sustainability/ ). Various sources predict that this market will
grow exponentially worldwide.
Assuming that this market keeps growing, we can foresee the following effects:
Fewer individuals will own cars. Instead, people will gradually switch to robo-
taxis to get to their destinations.
For logistics companies, trucks without drivers will expand their reach, as
algorithms require no rest, unlike human drivers.
As the demand for self-driving cars grows, so will the demand for the required
hardware, such as sensors.
A complete transition to autonomous driving will affect infrastructure. With
robotaxis, the demand for parking slots in city centers will be minimized,
allowing a considerable amount of space below concrete to be repurposed for
other uses.

81 4.1 Investment thesis
4.1.2 Challenging the idea
Conducting a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) analysis of
this investment idea enables a more in-depth examination, leading to a more detailed
exploration. We can use large language models (LLMs) to learn about them or
engage in discussions with domain experts within our network. Many experts raise
ethical questions about self-driving cars. Suppose an autonomous vehicle can’t pre-
vent an accident. An algorithm must decide whether to drive into a meadow, where it
will hit a person standing there, or hit a wall that will hurt the person in the car. A
lengthy discussion about possible priorities, which go far beyond this simple example,
and about other safety requirements, such as protection standards against hacking,
can slow down or halt the adoption of self-driving vehicles. 
Think like a science fiction author and imagine a world where autonomous driving is
fully adopted. Robotaxis follow a ride-hailing business model similar to Uber’s. You
order, you get in at your origin, leave the car at your destination, and the car picks up
the next passenger. Owning a car will be like owning a horse today; it will merely be a
status symbol. The moment autonomous driving is proven to be safer, expect insur-
ance companies to insist on higher premiums if people still choose to drive them-
selves, which may accelerate the adoption of autonomous driving.When people discuss autonomous driving, experts refer to it as level 5—full automa-
tion. Under the term Advanced Driver-Assistance System (ADAS), we summarize
many more technologies in greater detail that will eventually lead to full automation,
such as parking sensors or collision warnings. Each category in ADAS may be a valu-
able investment opportunity.
Just as digitalization has created new tech giants that didn’t exist before, the field of
autonomous driving can provide an environment for new start-ups to grow and
become significant players. Other companies may lose business due to the emer-
gence of autonomous driving.
Sub-thesis: Ethics and security may slow down, but not halt
A nation serious about its AI strategy can’t afford to prohibit the development of self-
driving cars due to concerns over ethics and security. Any country that halts its research
while others advance will quickly face a significant competitive disadvantage.
Additional bureaucracy, due to ethical and security concerns, may still deter some
contenders, and autocratic governments might have an advantage in enforcing inno-
vation compared to democracies. This presents a dilemma for investors, who must
weigh their preference for societies that value human rights against a nation’s sheer
“ability to execute.”

82 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
 In such a world, we can envision the vast amount of concrete in parking spaces
being pulverized into dust and replaced with fertile earth on which trees and gardens
can grow. We can imagine start-ups creating a business model by buying cars and leas-
ing them to companies that orchestrate rides, such as Uber. Of course, we can also
consider all the companies that build hardware for these cars. Let’s group potential
growth assets for autonomous driving:
Ride-hailing services —Companies that offer ride-hailing services can benefit
from cost reduction by replacing drivers with autonomous systems. 
Car manufacturers with a level-5 system —Leaders in the field of autonomous driv-
ing may increase sales if clients trust them more than their competitors. 
Truck manufacturers with a level-5 system —Driverless trucks can be operated 24/7
with only brief breaks for loading, unloading, and refueling.
Appliance providers —Some companies offer complete autonomous driving sys-
tems to car manufacturers, but they don’t manufacture cars themselves.
Component providers —Some companies produce components for autonomous
driving systems, encompassing both hardware and software at a high level.
We also need to consider countries where companies reside, as they create the space
for them to evolve. Without a doubt, the United States is the leader in the robotaxi
field. However, we can’t exclude other countries with a firm bid on technologies
enabling this transition, such as China, Israel, and Germany.
One way to move forward is to explore car manufacturers that haven’t yet established
a strong reputation in their robotaxi program but are performing better than is pub-
licly known. However, we need access to recent insider knowledge of employees work-
ing for these companies.
 Let’s explore suppliers whose products enable the development of autonomous
cars. A self-driving car relies on a combination of several key components to operate
autonomously. Following is a list of various additional components an autonomous
car needs:
Sensors:
–Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) —Measures distances using laser light to
create a 3D map of the environment.Sub-thesis: Known brands are already valued highly
Known brands working on solutions for robotaxis include Google (Waymo), Amazon
(Zoox), and Tesla. Their capabilities to innovate are already reflected in their stock
prices, so buying these shares means we’re not purchasing undervalued stocks.
Although these companies may be excellent investment opportunities otherwise
(Note: the author holds shares of two of these companies), we decide to focus on
smaller, lesser-known companies that have more substantial growth potential.

83 4.1 Investment thesis
–Radar —Uses radio waves to detect objects and their speeds, especially in
poor visibility conditions.
–Cameras —Provide visual information about the surroundings for object rec-
ognition and lane detection.
–Ultrasonic  sensors —Detect objects close to the vehicle, which is helpful for
parking and low-speed maneuvers.
Processing unit:
–Car processing units —Handle data from sensors, run machine learning mod-
els, and perform complex calculations to make real-time decisions.
Software:
–Perception algorithms —Interpret sensor data to recognize objects, pedestrians,
and road signs.
–Localization software —Determines the car’s precise location using GPS and
detailed maps.
–Planning and decision-making algorithms —Determine the best course of action
based on current and anticipated traffic situations.
–Control systems —Manage the vehicle’s speed, steering, and braking based on
the planned route.
Connectivity:
–Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communication —Enables communication with other
vehicles, infrastructure, and network services for enhanced situational aware-
ness and coordination.
Mapping:
–High-definition maps —Provide detailed information about road geometry, traf-
fic signals, and lane markings, which are crucial for accurate navigation.
Power supply:
–Battery and power management —Ensures all electronic components and sensors
are adequately powered.
Researching the potential change in demand for each of these components requires
considerable effort. We need to understand the industry and assess its specific details.
Some industries may depend heavily on raw materials and be vulnerable to shortages,
while others may face a market with a high number of competitors.
 If we were to write a book about investing in companies for autonomous driving,
we could dedicate a chapter to each component in the supply chain and analyze it in
detail, including individual SWOT analyses and a thorough technical study. Compar-
ing serious investing with gambling—picking a potentially promising company with-
out thorough research—highlights the significant effort required to make informed
decisions. This book aims to outline a research process. Therefore, we need to nar-
row our focus and skip detailed research on every component. Instead, we’ll illus-
trate the process within a specific domain and select LiDAR systems as a likely
candidate for research.

84 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
The methodology for identifying concrete assets to invest in becomes more appar-
ent with each step, and we define what we’re looking for more precisely. However,
we’re still proceeding. Let’s explore LiDAR further before selecting our first assets
to investigate.
4.1.3 Your investment thesis
We’ve demonstrated how to explore ideas to arrive at a thesis. Given that autonomous
driving is a game-changer, our theory is that the market for LiDAR systems will
rebound. 
 We can now begin with an in-depth analysis and collect as much information about
the market as possible. You can use note-taking apps such as Notion and OneNote to
structure your research. Some of us may collect all the notes in the data science note-
books we use for analysis. Just keep in mind that a significant amount of research
occurs outside of code environments.
 We gradually need to pick investment candidates and keep researching them. With
every research, here are the main questions:
Can the company generate immense cash in the upcoming years, outperform-
ing potential competitors?
How well can the company protect these profits from copycats? (Buffett calls
the ability of a company to wall itself from competitors an economic moat .)
How large is the margin of safety to protect oneself against risks?
Let’s explore this showcase further and examine the LiDAR market.Refined investment idea: LiDAR will rebound
While investing in AI and car manufacturers such as Tesla has been booming, the
share prices of companies that provide sensors and other types of hardware are
undervalued. As the LiDAR market is capital-intensive, many investors may be hesi-
tant, primarily due to the high interest rates of recent years. However, if the number
of robotaxi drives increases, demand for hardware will rise, and these companies will
see a corresponding rise in valuation.
LiDAR may also have applications beyond autonomous driving. The world is facing sig-
nificant demographic shifts, and the number of workers is expected to decline in the
upcoming years. LiDAR systems are part of factory automation, reducing the demand
for human workers. This reduction in worker demand is also highly beneficial in min-
ing, as some areas are inaccessible to human workers.
We see examples of many stocks that have successfully rebounded after unfavorable
times, and LiDAR wouldn’t be the first industry to be resurrected. If the market for
these sensors is down in 2025 and we expect demand to increase in the upcoming
years, we might consider buying low today and selling high later. 

85 4.2 LiDAR market
4.2 LiDAR market
The global LiDAR market was valued at approximately $2–$2.5 billion in 2023. With a
compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 20%–25%—the mean annual growth rate
of an investment over a period longer than one year—it’s expected to reach $6 to $8
billion within seven years. This growth rate appears promising, but further explora-
tion is needed to determine whether to invest in this market. Let’s examine the key
information that could influence our decision to invest in LiDAR:
Technology differentiation —LiDAR technologies can be divided into several types,
including time-of-flight, frequency-modulated continuous wave (FMCW), and
solid-state LiDAR. I spoke with an autonomous driving expert who highlighted
that moving parts in hardware components lead to wear and tear, which makes
them more costly. He therefore sees an advantage in solid-state LiDAR systems,
which are also smaller than other LiDAR systems.
Cost efficiency and scalability —Different vendors offer systems with varying ranges,
resolutions, and accuracies. Superior performance often comes at a cost, which
is reflected in the total price of the system.
Some manufacturers may achieve a satisfactory performance with less costly
systems. Some of them may even attempt to find alternatives to expensive
LiDAR systems by relying solely on cameras.
Strategic partnerships —Some LiDAR manufacturers have partnered with automo-
tive, robotics, or industrial automation players. New deals with prominent com-
panies, such as Tesla and Ford, as well as tech giants Google and Amazon, could
indicate that LiDAR companies will become increasingly valuable.
Regulatory environment and market adoption —The LiDAR market covers autono-
mous driving, drones, and smart city initiatives. In addition, architects and engi-
neers (not to mention research scientists such as geologists, geographers, and
archaeologists) use LiDAR heavily. Companies with products that meet evolving
safety and regulatory standards (especially in automotive) will have an edge. To
cover this topic, we must discuss geopolitical challenges. As Chinese companies,
such as Huawei, have been banned by the United States, we must explore
whether Chinese LiDAR makers might face similar challenges.
Patent portfolio —Companies with a solid intellectual property portfolio in sensor
design, signal processing, or AI integration may have a sustainable competitive
advantage. This section will delve into considerable detail and may require a
deep technical understanding of the components of LiDAR systems. We need
to assess whether specific scanning technologies patented by companies pro-
vide them with a competitive advantage.
Competition —Smaller companies that innovate faster or disrupt traditional busi-
ness models may offer higher growth potential. In one of the interviews, an
expert expressed a strong opinion that he believes LiDAR start-ups lack the

86 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
power to compete against existing giants in the industry, which have been on
the market for years.
Financials and leadership —Strong balance sheets, low debt, and competent lead-
ership, along with a clear road map for growth, are essential. However, given
that LiDAR is capital-intensive, we must be vigilant for excessive cash burn rates
that don’t generate clear revenue.
4.2.1 Picking candidates
It’s time to select our first investment candidates. Although they may not yet be the
companies we invest in, we use them to learn more about what we’re looking for until
we can make final decisions. After conducting web research and reading articles on
various platforms, we selected four LiDAR manufacturers for an initial investigation. A
GenAI chat also supported the results of this initial research.
 An initial list of investment candidates is not finite. We can add new companies to
this list later or remove some as needed. However, we must find a way to determine
which assets are good investments, and we need to start somewhere. These are the
four candidates, listed by stock ticker in brackets.
Luminar Technologies (LAZR)
Innoviz Technologies (INVZ)
Ouster (OUST)
Aeva Technologies (AEVA)
We’re first interested in their market capitalization and earnings growth. The following
market capitalization code reuses the method to collect ratios from earlier chapters:
import yfinance as yf
import pandas as pd
def collect_ratios(tickers: list, ratios: list):Patience: A success factor
One likely outcome of an investment research sprint is that you end up with inconclu-
sive results. You may have spoken to many experts who contradict each other. You
examine the data of specific companies; the numbers are satisfactory, but more is
needed to convince you to invest a reasonable sum. Investors often also learn that
the biggest enemy of the best investment opportunity is the abundance of good
enough opportunities. If you purchase every asset you get excited about, you might
end up with a vast portfolio of many small- to medium-sized holdings. While diversifi-
cation itself is beneficial, losing track of what you’ve invested in and why is not.
Occasionally, the best course of action is to document all the research and take no
further action. Refrain from falling prey to the temptation of quick riches; instead,
staying risk-aware and keeping a clear head are often the basis for long-term suc-
cess. As a programmer, you know that you can rerun algorithms with new and better
data at a later stage. So, why rush when you can proceed with confidence?

87 4.2 LiDAR market
    rows = []
    
    for ticker in tickers:
        info = yf.Ticker(ticker).info
        row = [ticker] + [info.get(ratio, None) for ratio in ratios]
        rows.append(row)
    return pd.DataFrame(rows, columns=["Ticker"] + ratios)
objects = [“AEVA”, “LAZR”, “INVZ”, “OUST”]
for o in objects:
    ticker = yf.Ticker(o)
    print(f"ticker {o}: {ticker.info['marketCap']}")
Examining the results, we obtain the following market capitalization as of 2024: 
LAZR: $449,100,640
OUST: $308,347,328
AEVA: $175,966,752
INVZ: $136,608,288
These numbers also indicate that these companies still need to become mid-cap
stocks, which typically start with a valuation of $2 billion. The risk associated with a
lower valuation is significantly higher, as the “too big to fail” clause may still be appli-
cable for some companies. 
 Let’s examine these companies’ earnings to see their performance over the past
few years. The following code uses the Alpha Vantage library introduced in chapter 3
to explore this information:
from alpha_vantage.fundamentaldata import FundamentalData
objects = [“AEVA”, “LAZR”, “INVZ”, “OUST”]
fd = FundamentalData(key=key, output_format='pandas')
for o in objects:
    df_earnings = fd.get_earnings_annual(o)[0].set_index('fiscalDateEnding')
    print(f"ticker {o}: {df_earnings}")
We obtain the results shown in table 4.1 by ticker and reported earnings per share
(EPS).
Table 4.1 EPS score of four LiDAR producers
AEVA LAZR INVZ OUST
2024-06-30 -1.13 -0.37 -0.31 -1.08
2023-12-31 -0.65 -0.86 -0.85 -7.68
2022-12-31 -0.68 -0.78 -0.94 -0.74
2021-12-31 -0.51 -0.56 -2.34 -0.83
2020-12-31 -0.0185 -2.2127 -1.2487 -8.2332
2019-12-31 0.05 0.0585 -2.4782 N/A

88 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
The numbers suggest that COVID-19 may have affected industries, as their EPS scores
during the COVID years were lower than in other years. Nevertheless, the results show
a general tendency toward negative earnings.
 If you approach finance conservatively, you might object to investing in companies
without profits. Personal finance teaches us that spending more than earning eventu-
ally leads to high debts and misery. Entrepreneurs, however, understand that personal
and corporate finance sometimes follow different rules. It takes some start-ups years
to become profitable. When evaluating start-ups, investors focus on what a start-up is
projected to earn. If the outlook is substantial enough, banks and investors will con-
tinue to invest in these companies, even if they aren’t yet profitable.
4.2.2 Price development
Let’s examine how stock prices have developed in recent years, and we’ll get the same
picture with all four of them (see figures 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4). They started somewhere,
then there was hype about the stock, and they all fell. The obvious question, there-
fore, is whether they can rebound.
All four companies experienced a decline in share price. At the beginning of the
decade, there was hype surrounding autonomous vehicles. Interestingly, share prices
increased during the COVID-19 pandemic. Driverless cars may have sounded appeal-
ing to many during times of social distancing. Additionally, it’s worth noting that
LiDAR is used to automate factory work, which means a reduced dependency on
human labor.
LAZR
600
500
400
300
200
100
0Price
2020-01 2020-07 2021-01 2021-07 2022-01 2022-07 2023-01 2023-07 2024-01 2024-07
DateClosing Price
Figure 4.1 Price development of Luminar Technologies (LAZR)

89 4.2 LiDAR market
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2Price
2020-07 2021-01 2021-07 2022-01 2022-07 2023-01 2023-07 2024-01 2024-07
DateClosing PriceINVZ
Figure 4.2 Price development of Innoviz Technologies Ltd (INVZ)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0Price
2021-01 2021-07 2022-01 2022-07 2023-01 2023-07 2024-01 2024-07
DateClosing PriceOUST
Figure 4.3 Price development of Ouster (OUST)

90 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
Following the COVID-19 pandemic, the shares declined. This decline can be attributed
to the notion that the market was overhyped and that inflation fears, arising from the
pandemic, particularly affected a capital-intensive industry with significant cash burn.
Starting in 2022, the Fed increased its interest rate to combat inflation, as shown in
figure 4.5. As it became more expensive to lend money, investors may have lost inter-
est in capital-intensive LiDAR stocks.
2020-01 2020-07 2021-01 2021-07 2022-01 2022-07 2023-01 2023-07 2024-01 2024-07
Date100
80
60
40
20
0PriceAEVA
Closing Price
Figure 4.4 Price development of Aeva Technologies (AEVA)
PercentFederal Funds Eﬀective Rate
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US) via FRED®
Shaded areas indicate U.S. recessions.2021-01 2021-07 2022-01 2022-07 2023-01 2023-07 2024-01 2024-07 2025-01 2025-07
fred.stlouisfed.org6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Figure 4.5 The interest rate at which depository institutions trade federal funds (Source: 
https:/ /fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DFF )

91 4.2 LiDAR market
Let’s explore the highs and lows of all stocks in table 4.2 to gain a deeper understand-
ing of their price movements.
As these four companies are so far below their peak, let’s consider scenarios in which
they get back on track. Let’s explore a scenario that sounds like a path to riches and
will give us the necessary drive to keep researching.
We must now determine the likelihood of these four companies returning to their for-
mer levels. Investors had already been enthusiastic about the stock, and those who
had invested after the IPO—when the stock went public—were already heavily disap-
pointed. The question is whether it’s even possible to recoup the initial investment.
Let’s examine the debt.
4.2.3 Debt
As LiDAR companies are capital-intensive, debt is a viable option to consider. If we call the
method collect ratios with the parameters having the signature collect_ratios(objects,
[“sector”,  “industry”,  “debtToEquity”]),  we obtain the results in table 4.3.
 Table 4.2 Down from the all-time high
Ticker High Low Down
AEVA $100.00 $3.33 96.67%
LAZR $41.80 $0.91 97.82%
OUST $162.50 $6.36 96.09%
INVZ $16.00 $0.79 95.06%
Speculative scenario: LiDAR stocks rebounding
Suppose we invested $40,000 equally among four assets, and all of these stocks
return to their former heights. We would receive approximately 3,003 shares of AEVA,
10,989 shares of LAZR, 1,572 shares of OUST, and 12,658 shares of INVZ. Multi-
plying these by the high value would result in $1,217,675.75. An investment of
$40,000 would make us millionaires. However, we must also note that if all four com-
panies go bankrupt (obviously we don’t want that to happen), we may lose $40,000.
Nevertheless, if three go bankrupt and only one returns to its former glory, we would
still make a profit.
We can formulate a speculative hypothesis: once federal interest rates decrease, the
share prices of capital-intensive LiDAR companies are likely to rebound. Even if they
don’t return to their former heights, we can still make a profit by buying low and sell-
ing high.

92 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
Based on the financial data, AEVA and LAZR might be more troubled than the others.
LAZR has a higher total debt than its market cap. Looking at the news, we also see that
LAZR has announced a workforce reduction. Additionally, being listed among the
most shorted stocks on Wall Street isn’t a positive sign ( https:/ /mng.bz/WwXd ). This
doesn’t mean that these companies are on the verge of bankruptcy. According to the
SEC filings, Austin Russell, the founder of Luminar, holds 104.5 million shares, which
comprise approximately 35% of Luminar’s total outstanding shares. This high owner-
ship could mean significant room for equity investments. Additionally, according to
Crunchbase, the last equity investment in Luminar was made in December 2022. A
viable business with growing potential offers ample investment opportunities. At the
same time, it’s also clear that executives might want to wait before bringing in addi-
tional investors if there’s room for the company to increase its valuation on its own.
4.2.4 Management
Many investors look at management to understand the potential. All companies are
led by their founders. Austin Russel is the founder of Luminar. Omer David Keilaf
cofounded and is the CEO of Innoviz. Cofounder Soroush Salehian leads Aeva, and
Angus Pacala is the cofounder and CEO of Ouster.
 We can continue to monitor the market; a leadership change could be a strong sig-
nal in the market, but we can disregard this aspect for now. If founders leave these
companies, it’s a warning sign. Investment decisions are often based on monitoring
companies and reacting to events. For instance, if founders leave, it could be a signal
to short-sell the company.
4.2.5 Technology and partnership
We can also explore these companies’ LiDAR systems to determine whether they offer
better or worse performance:
AEVA —FMCW
LAZR —Hybrid solid-state (with emphasis on long-range 1550 nm lasers)
INVZ —MEMS-Based Solid-State
OUST —Digital Solid-State (VCSEL-based)Table 4.3 Debt-to-equity results for LiDAR companies
Ticker sector industry debtToEquity
AEVA Technology Software - Infrastructure 3.504
LAZR Consumer Cyclical Auto Parts NaN
OUST Consumer Cyclical Auto Parts 26.658
INVZ Technology Electronic Components 39.549
NaN = not a number.

93 4.2 LiDAR market
LLMs are great research assistants. You can ask them to rank companies and highlight
their value propositions. ChatGPT returned the following ranking in response to a
simple prompt to rank them:
1Aeva (AEVA) for its unique FMCW technology and velocity measurement
2Luminar (LAZR) for its long-range, cost-effective LiDAR solution
3Innoviz (INVZ) for solid-state LiDAR and automotive partnerships
4Ouster (OUST) for affordable digital LiDAR and scalability
All companies have product road maps. For instance, Luminar Halo is designed for
mainstream consumer vehicles. In addition, all the manufacturers have partnerships
with existing car manufacturers. Luminar is deploying its LiDAR system in a Volvo car,
a brand known for its maximum robustness. BMW uses Innoviz solid-state LiDAR sys-
tems, and AEVA sells its products to Daimler Trucks. Ouster lists Zoox, the Amazon-
owned autonomous vehicle company, as a client. Ouster might differentiate itself
from the others in the market. The company aims for broader adoption of LiDAR,
such as in smart cities.
 Experts tend to disagree on the time that we’ll be fully autonomous. The pessimists
still consider decades rather than a few years as realistic. When discussing full auto-
mation, we highlight a scenario in which an autonomous car manages all possible
scenarios. Imagine you’ve been using robotaxi rides for years, but then your ride unex-
pectedly crashes because the system becomes confused by a specific combination of
conditions. Considering all the details a vehicle might have to manage, it becomes
clear that covering the edge cases is the real challenge.
 You encounter scenarios where a car performs one functionality well (e.g., auto-
mated parking) but needs time to master other cases (driving in historically grown cit-
ies with all their narrow alleys and facing human drivers who don’t always follow
rules). The term operational design domain  addresses this by placing automation within
a specific context. Waymo doesn’t build cars for the consumer market. It provides taxi
services in the city and doesn’t sell vehicles to individuals, as the car ownership busi-
ness model is becoming obsolete. Eyeing another use case, the German Autobahn
doesn’t have speed limits. Traveling at 200 mph or more from Berlin to Munich in an
autonomous vehicle is one use case that residents of Germany would love to have. A
use case that supports cars at this speed is uninteresting for the US market without
regulatory changes in maximum speed limits. Therefore, companies targeting the
German market may prioritize their capabilities to be fast and autonomous, while oth-
ers focus on excelling in other areas, such as city driving.
 Another consideration is limitations and poor capabilities. Lousy driving condi-
tions, such as fog, can hinder even the best drivers. However, most sensors are supe-
rior to the human eye, and autonomous cars are less limited by visual conditions.
 You spend significant research time exploring companies in complex technical
domains. To be effective, you must structure and continuously deepen your knowl-
edge base. In technology, seemingly minor features—often overlooked without

94 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
domain-specific expertise—can be game changers. You don’t need to master every
technical detail, but you must understand how components interact, know which
questions to ask, and know whom to ask.
4.2.6 Projected earnings
Let’s examine the projected earnings for the four companies on the market. Their
earnings per share and projected revenue growth, as of November 2024, are listed in
table 4.4, based on data from the investment platform Seeking Alpha.
Examining these projections, it would be irrational not to invest if they could be guar-
anteed. Several details in these projections require validation. LAZR is expected to
grow revenues by more than 10 times in three years; this sounds ambitious. Let’s see if
we can gather different data from other sources.
 We can explore whether we get similar data from Python using financial libraries.
We can run this code, which fetches and interprets earnings estimates collected with
the yfinance library:
objects = [“AEVA”, “LAZR”, “INVZ”, “OUST”]
for o in objects:
    stock = yf.Ticker(o)
    print(f"{o}: {stock.earnings_estimate}")
The results of this query yield different outcomes. Table 4.5 displays the transcribed
earnings estimates of Luminar, with the timespan on the left and expected average,
low, and high results. The yearsAgoEps  column refers to the value in the last epoch.
Examining the first row, yearsAgoEps  of -3 corresponds to the result of the quarter pre-
ceding it.Table 4.4 Projected earnings in millions
Ticker Dec 2024 Dec 2027 Growth
AEVA 6.63 32 (in 2026) 382.65%
INVZ 24.30 670 2660.49%
LAZR 70.28 851 1110.8%
OUST 111.00 311.80 180.9%
Source: Seeking Alpha 
Table 4.5 Earnings estimates of Luminar Technologies
avg low high yearsAgoEps NrOfAnalysts growth
0q -1.99971 -2.25 -1.71885 -3 4 0.3334
+1q -1.82250 -2.10 -1.50000 -2.85 4 0.3605

95 4.3 Risks
This data indicates that Luminar is still expected to post no profits. On the positive
side, losses are expected to narrow significantly compared to prior periods. From last
year’s EPS of –13.05, we expect an EPS of –9.94 for that year, representing a 24%
improvement. The company is improving and burning less cash. If the trend doesn’t
change, it’s a matter of time before a profit is achieved. However, as there’s no profit
yet in sight, risk is involved.
 Earnings of start-ups may be the most difficult items to project. To forecast the
future, we often need to rely on past data. Ouster was founded in 2015, Luminar in
2012, and Innoviz and Aeva in 2016. We can assume that these companies were wait-
ing for autonomous driving to become mainstream so they could monetize the idea
that, at some point, every car in the world would need “eyes.” Using the number of
past earnings for these companies may not be a reliable source. One of the companies
might land a big deal that suddenly becomes a game changer. This may be the time to
stop and wait for market signals: a large contract with a major player, some informa-
tion that the project is progressing well, or that the car is exceeding expectations.
4.3 Risks
Suppose we become obsessed with making millions by buying shares of undervalued
LiDAR companies and selling them at high prices. We might lose objectivity—too
many individuals who sank money into dreams ended up in nightmares.
 Exploring risks may be even more important than analyzing potential benefits. If
you miss a good investment opportunity, it might hurt your pride, but losing money
can be even more devastating, especially if you later discover that a loss could have
been prevented with better risk management.0y -9.94375 -10.20 -9.62 -13.05 4 0.2380
+1y -6.53799 -7.60 -5.85 -9.94 4 0.3425
Analyzing other fields
The purpose of this chapter is to outline the process of identifying growth companies.
This research process often becomes far more extensive and iterative, with cycles of
building up theses, learning from new events or insights, and refining knowledge to
adjust the investment strategy.
Select the domains you’re familiar with. If you’re knowledgeable in biotech, research
companies working on mRNA vaccines. If you’re skeptical about this approach, con-
sider weight loss drugs as a strong alternative to explore. Continue researching until
you find the equivalent of a start-up’s unfair advantage ( https://mng.bz/8XEW ).Table 4.5 Earnings estimates of Luminar Technologies  (continued)
avg low high yearsAgoEps NrOfAnalysts growth

96 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
 Hedge funds often split the roles of analysts between those who research risks and
those who research returns. This creates checks and balances to prevent overly opti-
mistic investments.
 If we invest alone, we can switch viewpoints. One day, you let yourself get excited
and explore all the good things that can happen. Another day, you switch roles and
analyze the opportunity from a pessimist’s perspective. Seeing this opportunity from
multiple angles will increase your chances of making the right decisions.
 Let’s imagine we’re approached by an overly excited investor who claims that
“LiDAR stocks will rebound once the federal interest rates go down.” Our job is now
to explore reasons why this optimist might be wrong and what we need to analyze to
reduce uncertainties.
4.3.1 Falling into obsolescence
Tesla Vision is a program that explores an autonomous driving future in which better
computer vision algorithms replace LiDAR sensors. Many experts debate whether
Elon Musk’s bet on a future without LiDAR systems is a good move. Many believe that
level-5 autonomous driving without laser sensors that measure the distance to objects
is impossible. However, what if Tesla’s strategy pays off?
 LiDAR systems are costly components. If automakers can achieve a good enough
level of performance without these sensors, they’ll likely eliminate them to make cars
more affordable for their customers.
 In the worst-case scenario, LiDAR companies focusing mainly on the automotive
market could lose their very existence. Before investing seriously in LiDAR, a deeper
understanding of LiDAR alternatives is helpful.
4.3.2 Squashed by industry giants
Waymo’s business model is to offer robotaxi rides to consumers. They don’t manufac-
ture cars on their own. Let’s consider a scenario in which Waymo management
decides to sell appliances to other car manufacturers, enabling them to reach level-5
automation. Competing with Alphabet, which offers a comprehensive platform as one
of the pioneering companies in the field of autonomous driving, might be challeng-
ing. The bad news for those interested in investing in LiDAR start-ups is that Waymo
builds its own hardware.
 The four companies we investigated are start-ups that try to gain a larger market
share with their hardware. Many existing larger corporations have been providing
LiDAR systems to their automotive clients for years. One example is Valeo, a company
headquartered in France. Suppose you are a car manufacturer who is deciding on new
LiDAR systems for an upcoming model. You’ve tested the hardware of various suppli-
ers. Let’s assume the hardware of both a new start-up and a large supplier you’ve been
working with for many years scored equally. Would you pick the smaller supplier,
whom you don’t know well yet, and take on more risk due to their small size?

97 4.4 Ongoing analysis
4.3.3 Globalization and conflicts
Innoviz Technologies is headquartered in Israel. At the time of writing this chapter,
Israel is involved in ongoing conflicts. Forecasting how existing conflicts evolve is
beyond the scope of this book; however, we must acknowledge that companies head-
quartered in a country facing conflict are at risk.
 We’ve also seen trade wars between the United States and China. The United
States has already banned Huawei, so why couldn’t the American government investi-
gate banning Chinese LiDAR companies from the US market? Hesai Group, the lead-
ing Chinese manufacturer, might face challenges in the US market. Looking at recent
news, they had already been blacklisted at the Pentagon, which was reversed after the
company sued ( https:/ /mng.bz/KwzE ).
 In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Germany’s companies were among the leading
producers of solar panels. More than 20 years later, China is responsible for over 80%
of the world’s photovoltaics manufacturing capacity across the supply chain. Some
experts argue that China’s economic model of state intervention can give Chinese
companies an unfair advantage. To understand this risk better, we would have to
explore scenarios in which state-controlled interventions affect the market and assess
their likelihood.
4.4 Ongoing analysis
We can compare looking for investment opportunities to a hunter waiting for their
prey. If they strike too soon or too late, they miss the target. Finding the right moment
is also crucial when hunting for investments.
 Like a real hunter, an investor also has limited shots. If you lock in your money too
early in investment opportunities, you may lack the capital when a better opportunity
arises. Therefore, an investment analysis might lead to a “let’s wait and see!” approach,
keeping an eye out for a more favorable opportunity. In this section, we explore how
to maintain continuous market screening.
4.4.1 Media
Investment platforms provide articles by analysts, for example, “LiDAR Quarterly
Insights Q3 2024 Summary” at https:/ /mng.bz/jZDV . An investor can subscribe to
newsletters to understand what other investors think. Additionally, platforms such as
Reddit often feature subreddits dedicated to specific stocks, and you can follow
companies on social media. High-quality content comes from reputable newspapers,
such as The Wall Street Journal , The Financial Times , or Bloomberg . For domains such as
LiDAR systems, there are notable magazines for experts who delve into the details
about the technology.
 One key challenge is to extract truthful content. LLMs might hallucinate, and
content from a company’s social media or investor relations department may not

98 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
always be objective. A specific event for every public company is the earnings report
assembly. No executive will ever say something like, “This quarter was horrible; we
completely failed in everything we set out to do.” Instead, the art is to read between
the lines. Sometimes, analysts need a solid domain understanding to interpret a CEO’s
words correctly.
4.4.2 Trend analysis
Tr end s  can b e  fo r es e e n by  analyzin g G oo gl e  s ear che s  o r has ht ags  o n s o ci al m ed ia.
Examining the LiDAR searches in figure 4.6, we observe that this topic has become
increasingly popular over time.
Let’s also explore the four companies we chose and examine how often they are
searched on Google. We can experiment by adjusting stock tickers and changing
names. After all, “ouster” also has a different meaning in English, and using the stock
ticker OUST doesn’t help. Figure 4.7 shows the results of a Google Trends investiga-
tion for the company names in 2024.
 
Figure 4.6 LiDAR in Google Trends

99 4.4 Ongoing analysis
We can also use Python code to collect information on trends. One library to accom-
plish this step is Pytrends. Let’s examine the following code, which collects historical
trend data from Google:
from pytrends.request import TrendReq
import pandas as pd
pytrend = TrendReq(hl='en-US', tz=360)
keywords = [“Luminar Technologies”, “Ouster Inc”, 
    “AEVA Technologies”, “Innoviz Technologies”]
pytrend.build_payload(keywords, cat=0, timeframe='today 12-m', 
    geo='', gprop='')
interest_over_time_df = pytrend.interest_over_time()
print(interest_over_time_df
.head())
interest_over_time_df.to_csv('google_trends_data.csv')
Examining the results allows us to continue screening for trends and observe if any-
thing changes. Table 4.6 shows the results.
 
Figure 4.7 Google Trends on Ouster, Luminar, AEVA Technologies, and Innoviz

100 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
Trends indicate how often users search for a keyword, but we need to conduct a news
sentiment analysis to examine the sentiments.
4.4.3 News sentiment analysis
We can collect news and comments from any form of media and analyze them with
algorithms. The Alpha Vantage library, introduced in chapter 3, provides methods
to collect reaggregated data. Let’s use the following code to examine the news senti-
ment score:
def collect_sentiments(ticker):
    import requests
    r = requests.get(f'https://www.alphavantage.co/query?
       function=NEWS_SENTIMENT&tickers={ticker}&apikey={key}')
    return pd.DataFrame.from_dict(r.json()['feed'])
def summarize_sentiments(df, ticker):
    from collections import Counter
    ticker_sentiment = df['ticker_sentiment']
    label_string = ""
    score = 0
    for record in ticker_sentiment:
        if record[0]['ticker'] == ticker:
            if label_string != "":
                label_string += ","
            label_string += record[0]['ticker_sentiment_label']
            score += float(record[0]['ticker_sentiment_score'])
    
    print(score)
    word_count = Counter(label_string.split(","))
    word_count_df = pd.DataFrame(word_count.items(), 
        columns=['Word', 'Count'])
    print(word_count_df)
Calling the method collect_sentiments  with the tickers of four start-ups will provide
us with a sentiment score, and we categorize news results from November 2024 asTable 4.6 Trends in Google search for LiDAR companies
Date Luminar Ouster AEVA Innoviz isPartial
2024-10-13 33 5 3 3 True
2024-10-06 43 5 4 3 False
2024-09-29 42 2 2 2 False
2024-09-22 48 0 0 0 False
2024-09-15 39 0 0 0 False

101 4.5 What is next
bullish (BU), somewhat bullish (SW BU), neutral (NEU), somewhat bearish (SW BE),
or bearish (BE) in table 4.7.
The news tends to be positive. We still want to be cautious. What if most of the sources
are from investors who plan to invest? Therefore, it’s helpful to continue analyzing
trends, exploring shifts when they occur, and checking the sources carefully.
4.4.4 Measuring success
Whatever thesis you follow, always ask yourself how to measure success. Some break-
throughs aren’t immediately visible in revenues or profits. The best sources are often
insiders, such as company employees. Experts working on crucial projects are com-
monly prohibited from disclosing their insights publicly.
 In the reference example of autonomous driving, we can count the number of
robotaxis on the street and monitor the media for upcoming deals and contracts. One
way to assess whether you’ve done proper work in creating your investment thesis is to
evaluate how easily you can find the metrics to measure its success. If you’re unsure
what to look for, you should take more time to refine your thesis.
4.5 What is next
Many analysts who carefully read our LiDAR study may agree that there are still many
details that require further research before a decision can be made. This exploration
of LiDAR can be concluded in a “wait and see” scenario. Some bolder investors might
choose to invest. One detail that every investor needs to decide for themselves is how
much time they want to spend on analysis before making a decision. Even though
LLMs can speed up the research process, thorough analysis may still take time.
 We’ve outlined many risks. One day, we might discover that Tesla Vision is on the
right track and that the market for LiDAR in the automotive sector is being disrupted.
However, we could also find that Tesla’s approach without LiDAR is failing. Other
market signals can influence the future of LiDAR stocks. While investigating start-ups,
we found that one of them is likely to be acquired by a larger company, which would
probably boost share prices.
 The definition of an ideal company to invest in is one that is poised to generate
substantial cash flow for several years while maintaining a strong economic moat. BasedTable 4.7 The sentiment score of selected LiDAR companies
Ticker Score BU SW BU NEU SW BE BE
INVZ 1.197801 0 6 16 1 0
OUST 6.714778 10 10 4 0 0
LAZR 4.497577 5 9 11 1 0
AEVA 1.623819 1 5 22 1 0

102 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
on the existing analysis, we’ve identified candidates with a promising future. However,
we must acknowledge that there’s still considerable uncertainty. The decision-making
process depends significantly on the individual investor’s strategy:
Some bold investors might see enough evidence to invest money.
Cautious investors may spend more time researching the company. Some may
conclude that the risks aren’t worth the potential gains and pick more conserva-
tive choices.
Some investors may also employ a mixed strategy. They start investing a small
amount and keep researching.
Summary
Gambling is often guided by instinct, whereas investing is led by critical think-
ing. Success isn’t guaranteed, but investors can continually reflect on the out-
comes of past decisions and learn from them for the future.
We tend to overestimate our skills in areas that are new to us. This tendency is
perilous, as it can lead to taking unnecessary risks. Stick to what you know and
invest in businesses that you understand.
An investment thesis highlights why you believe an investment will be profit-
able. It requires structured research that may take some time.Some speculative ideas to explore
Lastly, if you don’t come up with ideas for researching investment areas, here are
some ideas that could be interesting for you to explore:
With the COVID-19 pandemic, we’ve witnessed a significant advancement in
mRNA technology. Vaccine providers now have access to numerous resources
for researching new applications of mRNA. What would happen if one of these
providers were to discover a vaccine against cancer?
Climate change is having an increasingly significant effect on the world. What
measures are necessary to mitigate its effects, and which technologies could
help mitigate it? Consider renewable energy or carbon sequestration.
Obesity is affecting the health of many people in the world, and many con-
sumers still believe in traditional beauty standards. What are the criteria that
a weight loss drug must provide so it can become popular globally?
Vegan products are often cheaper than meat. However, carnivores claim that
meat alternatives still don’t taste like real meat. What if a food producer cre-
ated a vegan product that tastes as good as meat?
Every day, we face new threats in geopolitical challenges. Which solutions are
needed to overcome these threats?
While many AI companies are already highly valued, consider also those firms
that indirectly contribute to the adoption of AI. Take energy as a reference.
Data centers require a substantial amount of energy constantly. Which energy
sources can provide that and ideally don’t emit too much carbon dioxide?

103 Summary
Peer reviews are invaluable for refining a thesis. Invite others to question your
assumptions and test your reasoning.
Investing in what you know is key to success. Violate this principle, and you may
as well be throwing darts blindfolded. There are many different influences on a
market, and understanding them often requires extensive experience. There-
fore, it’s better to invest in something that you know well.
Explore innovations such as autonomous driving to stay ahead of the market.
To find investments, you must explore possible investments within that industry
that solve a specific problem better than others.
Investors and founders share the same challenge: they need to find a successful
business idea. The investor, however, doesn’t need to operate the business.
We need to consider potential risks, such as ethical risks or risks of obsoles-
cence, as illustrated in the case study.
One way to find good investments is to look for undervalued companies, which
are often those that already receive little attention from investors. Therefore,
we might look for players in a niche who can contribute a significant amount of
unseen value.
Try to find companies that will generate a significant amount of cash for an
extended period with a new business model. If their business model can’t be
easily copied or challenged by competitors, you have a candidate for a high-per-
forming growth stock. Finding these companies takes work and patience.
Seeing an opportunity’s potential isn’t enough; we must thoroughly challenge
and assess ideas.
Start-ups may take years to produce profits; however, if the business model is
strong, we can benefit significantly from investing in a not-yet-profitable com-
pany in an emerging market. Start-ups and small companies also might run into
liquidity problems more easily than larger companies.
Hardly anyone invests more time and energy into a company as a founder. It’s
often a sign of strength if they remain part of the management team; we must
be vigilant to learn about founders who are leaving.
Technology might make a difference. However, we must also consider the cost
factors and other aspects that may determine whether a product penetrates
the market. There’s no guarantee that the best product will become the mar-
ket leader.
Missing an investment opportunity might hurt your pride; however, ignoring it
may result in financial loss.
Knowledge is profit. Always know what you’re buying.
Be aware that every product might become obsolete. Keep an eye on the com-
petition and the market.
When betting on start-ups, you risk more to aim for higher returns. However,
start-ups often must prevail against larger corporations in the markets.

104 CHAPTER  4Growth portfolios
Geopolitics will increasingly affect the performance of companies in the global
market.
In doubt, don’t invest, but keep your ears open for changes that allow you to
revisit your analysis.
An investor can analyze trends and news sentiments for investment areas.
When possible, seek the advice or analysis of an expert in the domain you’re
considering investing in.
Be always skeptical. Hear all, but trust nothing until you have enough evidence.
Investigate partnerships and connections with other industries, including
potential partnerships that aren’t yet formal.
Some investors look for companies where they believe their value is artificially
or temporarily suppressed (value investing). Others look for companies that
might disrupt markets with a game-changing product or service (growth invest-
ing). Both approaches can overlap.
When exploring companies to invest in, also study industry- and product-spe-
cific risks. For instance, some companies may be capital-intensive and face risks
when interest rates are high. Others may face the risk of a product-market fit
mismatch.

105Income portfolios
Chapter 4 explored how identifying outliers can give you an edge in beating the
market. We use these techniques to identify undervalued stocks ( value investing ) or
look for companies with new technologies or business models that will outperform
others ( growth investing ). This approach, however, also means settling for delayed
gratification. We might have to wait years until our shares have gained enough cap-
ital appreciation to sell them again for enough profit.
 For many who have experienced challenging jobs or projects, just seeing the
rewards of investment portfolios on a cash account and mapping them with exist-
ing recurring expenses triggers a strong feeling of freedom and assurance. The
more you rely on your salary, the more permanent your job feels. The moment you
stop needing it, every job feels temporary.This chapter covers
Strategies to create passive income
Finding stocks that pay solid dividends
When to choose bonds over stocks for income 
portfolios
Using cryptocurrency staking to generate 
passive income

106 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
 This chapter will focus on passive income—investments with recurring payouts.
While the previous chapter focused exclusively on stocks, this chapter will also explore
two other asset types: bonds and cryptocurrency. Let’s begin by examining how to
maximize recurring payments through stock dividends.
NOTE Fixed income  refers to an investment that pays the investor a fixed amount
on a fixed schedule. However, many typical fixed-income investments have
variants where we get varying payments on a fixed schedule (e.g., bonds with
a floating rate or crypto staking rewards). For that reason, the term passive
income is broader as it considers these fluctuations.
5.1 Dividends
A dividend  is a portion of a company’s profit that is paid to its shareholders. To under-
stand the purpose of dividends, let’s consider how companies evolve after they are
incorporated.
 In their early stages, companies focus on growth and establishing a foothold in
their markets. Revenue is reinvested into expansion, whether by hiring new employ-
ees, developing improved products or services, or increasing operational capacity.
During this phase, companies typically don’t pay dividends. Instead, shareholders of
startups benefit primarily from the potential for exponential growth—the transforma-
tion of a small garage-based enterprise into a thriving, steady business. Investing in
these evolving companies often follows the high-risk, high-reward principle.
 As a company matures and establishes itself
in the market, its growth rate slows. At this stage,
companies generate consistent profits, and
investing all of their earnings in an even more
aggressive campaign to grow further would no
longer pay off, as they have already established
themselves as leaders in the most profitable
markets. Instead, this stability allows them to
pay a portion of their profits to shareholders as
dividends, making them attractive to investors
seeking passive income. Mature companies pay-
ing regular dividends often represent lower-
risk investment opportunities.
 This lifecycle of company evolution aligns
with the Boston Consulting Group (BCG)
Growth-Share Matrix. As illustrated in figure 5.1,
the ideal dividend-paying stock is a “cash cow”—
a business that generates stable profits with mini-
mal reinvestment requirements, allowing surplus
funds to be distributed to shareholders.Star
DogQuestion Mark
Cash CowLow High
High
LowMarket Share
Growth
Figure 5.1 The BCG Growth-Share 
Matrix as a reference for picking 
dividend-paying companies that are 
likely cash cows (© https:/ /productfolio
.com/growth-share-matrix/ )

107 5.1 Dividends
 We must first clarify our criteria for using data to identify dividend stocks. It’s not
just larger companies with higher market capitalizations that are more likely to pay
dividends; the type of industry also plays a crucial role. For example, companies in the
utilities sector tend to pay higher dividends than those in the technology industry.
Consider a utility company that supplies water or electricity to homes. Their business
model is stable and supported by extensive infrastructure, such as pipelines and
cables. This infrastructure acts as an economic moat—a competitive advantage that
makes it difficult for rivals to encroach on their market share. At the same time, these
companies face challenges in driving competitors out of other regions, as those rivals
possess similar infrastructure elsewhere.
 While the risks of losses are minimized in such industries, the growth potential is
also limited. Figure 5.2 outlines examples of economic moats, highlighting how a long
profit history in a saturated market and minimal competitive threats create the per-
fect conditions for a stable, dividend-paying company.
Conversely, most tech companies must continuously invest in R&D to stay in business
and find the next big thing in the market. Apple, Microsoft, NVIDIA, and other major
tech firms would cease to thrive if they stopped investing in research or acquiring
innovative startups that bring new products and ideas to them. For these companies, it
makes sense to keep dividend payments small to allocate more funds toward innova-
tion and research initiatives.
Proprietary Information
Innovation
Network Effect
Locked-Up
SupplyRegional
OligopoliesIntellectual
PropertyScaleBrand Loyalty
Figure 5.2 Examples of economic moats

108 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
One reference example of a dividend stock is the Coca-Cola Company. Its economic
moat is its brand recognition. Supermarkets and restaurants are unlikely to remove
Coca-Cola from their shelves or menus, making it hard to imagine the company’s cash
flow running dry.
 However, detecting long-term cash flow risks is essential. Take the tobacco industry
as an example. Many tobacco companies pay excellent dividends, but as an investor,
you must decide what future you foresee for them. Some argue that tobacco products
are in decline and that the industry will face severe challenges when the percentage of
smokers in the population becomes negligible. Others believe these companies will
successfully transform to provide alternative products with better prospects than tradi-
tional cigarettes. Regardless of your belief, investing in companies within an industry
without confidence in their long-term success is unwise. 
 In chapter 2, we partially covered dividend metrics and ratios, but now we need to
go deeper. Applying the algorithm becomes trivial if we know what to look for. The
following parameters can be essential for finding suitable dividend investments:
Annual payout —The total amount paid out per share per year.
Dividend payout frequency —How often dividends are paid out per year, which is
usually monthly, quarterly, semi-annually, annually, or irregularly. In most cases,
yearly payouts are distributed equally. For example, a $1 annual payout per
share results in $0.25 per quarter if paid quarterly.
Dividend yield —Calculated by dividing the annual payout per share by the share
price. A high dividend yield isn’t always a positive indicator; it can also signal a
falling share price, which increases the risk of a reduced annual payout.Examples of economic moats
Here are some examples of economic moats per category:
Proprietary information —Coca-Cola’s secret formula gives it a competitive
advantage by making its product difficult to replicate.
Brand loyalty —Apple customers are highly loyal and willing to pay premium
prices for iPhones despite alternatives with similar or better specs.
Innovation —Tesla disrupted the auto industry by pioneering electric vehicle
technology, battery efficiency, and self-driving capabilities.
Scale —Amazon benefits from economies of scale, offering lower prices and
faster shipping than smaller competitors.
Network effect —Facebook (Meta) becomes more valuable as more people
join, making it difficult for competitors to attract users.
Locked-up supply —De Beers historically controlled the diamond supply,
restricting access and maintaining high prices.
Intellectual property —Pfizer’s patents on drugs such as Viagra and COVID-19
vaccines prevent competitors from replicating their products.
Regional oligopolies —Utilities such as electricity providers in many regions
operate as regulated monopolies or oligopolies, facing little to no competition.

109 5.1 Dividends
Dividend growth —This metric tracks how many years a company has consistently
increased its dividends. Companies with long histories of raising dividends,
such as Coca-Cola with 62 years of increases, are considered reliable long-term
income stocks.
Dividend growth rate —The rate at which a company grows its dividends. Some
companies grow their dividends faster than others, but larger companies may
take a slower approach to increases.
Payout ratio —The fraction of a company’s net income paid to shareholders. A
smaller payout ratio suggests more room for growth and reinvestment.
Residence of the company —Your residency can affect taxation. For example, non-
US investors may face additional taxes when investing in US-based companies
compared to those headquartered elsewhere.
The script in listing 5.1 calculates the dividend growth per year. To do this, we calcu-
late the sum of dividends paid in the first and last year, and then we can determine the
average yearly increase. Next, we calculate the payouts per year by counting the fre-
quency of dividend payments and deducting the payment frequency.
def calc_div_growth_rate (stock):
    try:
        dividends = stock.dividends
        if dividends.empty:
            return None, None
        dividends_by_year = dividends.resample('YE').sum()  
        if len(dividends_by_year) > 1:                      
            first_year = dividends_by_year.index[0].year    
            last_year = dividends_by_year.index[-1].year    
            first_dividend = dividends_by_year.iloc[0]      
            last_dividend = dividends_by_year.iloc[-1]      
            num_years = last_year - first_year              
            cagr = ((last_dividend / first_dividend) 
                ** (1 / num_years)) - 1                     
        else:
            cagr = None
        payouts_per_year = dividends.resample('YE').
                count().mean()                         
        if payouts_per_year > 3.5:                     
            payout_frequency = "Quarterly"             
        elif payouts_per_year > 1.5:                   
            payout_frequency = "Semi-Annual"           
        elif payouts_per_year > 0.5:                   
            payout_frequency = "Annual"                
        else:
            payout_frequency = "Irregular"Listing 5.1 Calculating dividend growth
Gets the 
dividend sum 
by years
Calculates 
growth rate 
(CAGR)
Determines 
payout 
frequency

110 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
        return cagr, payout_frequency
    except Exception as e:
        print(f"Error processing {stock}: {e}")
        return None, None
Executing listing 5.2 loads companies from the S&P 500 index and extracts their divi-
dend metrics. As the results of executing the code will vary depending on the execution
time, we’ll look at some results we got during the execution while writing this book. 
 In the second method, we collect ticker data through the tickers and filter by divi-
dend-paying companies and those whose market cap exceeds a minimum threshold.
This threshold is passed to the function as a parameter.
import requests
import pandas as pd
import yfinance as yf
from io import StringIO
def get_sp500_tickers():
    url = "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/"
        "List_of_S%26P_500_companies"               
    response = requests.get(url)                    
    tables = pd.read_html(StringIO(response.text))  
    sp500_table = tables[0]                         
    return sp500_table["Symbol"].tolist()           
def get_stocks_with_dividends_and_high_market_cap\
    (tickers, market_cap_threshold):
    data = []
    for ticker in tickers:                
        try:
            stock = yf.Ticker(ticker)     
            info = stock.info             
            if info.get("dividendYield") and 
                   info.get("marketCap") >= market_cap_threshold:
                cagr, payout_frequency = (
                    calc_div_growth_rate(stock))          
                data.append({
                    "Ticker": ticker,                     
                    "Name": info.get("longName", "N/A"),  
                    "Market Cap": info.get("marketCap"),  
                    "Dividend Yield": info.
                    get("dividendYield"),                 
                    "Sector": info.get("sector", "N/A"),  
                    "payoutRatio": info.
                    get("payoutRatio", "N/A"),            
                    "dividendRate": info.
                    get("dividendRate", "N/A"),           
                    "cagr": cagr,                         
                    "payout_frequency": payout_frequency, 
                })Listing 5.2 Executing code
Collects all 
tickers from S&P 
500 companies
Collects company 
data from all tickers
Gets dividend data

111 5.1 Dividends
        except Exception as e:
            print(f"Error processing {ticker}: {e}")
    return pd.DataFrame(data)
Running this code, we can review various companies in the DataFrame and form
investment theses. Let’s look at some outliers. Thermo Fisher Scientific (TMO) has a
low payout ratio—at the time of writing, it’s 7.09%. At the same time, dividend payments
have grown for some years. Therefore, an investor could assess this company now based
on the theory that TMO has a lot of room to grow if we compare the payout ratios to
those of other companies. An investor who believes in the long-term business model of
TMO could see an investment in this company as a long-term investment.
Real estate investment trusts
Real estate investment trusts (REITs) can be viewed as a distinct category among div-
idend-paying stocks. If you’re seeking steady cash flow and diversification in your
income portfolio, REITs are a compelling option. They offer several advantages for
building an income portfolio:
High dividend yields —REITs are required by law to distribute at least 90% of
their taxable income to shareholders as dividends, resulting in consistent
and often higher-than-average yields compared to traditional dividend stocks.
Portfolio diversification —Adding REITs introduces real estate exposure to your
portfolio, diversifying away from equities and bonds. Real estate tends to
have low correlation with other asset classes, providing stability.
Hedge against inflation —Real estate assets typically appreciate over time, and
rental income often rises with inflation, making REITs a good inflation hedge.
Liquidity —Unlike directly owning property, publicly traded REITs can be bought
and sold on stock exchanges, offering liquidity without the complexities of
managing real estate.
Professional management —Professionals manage REITs, meaning you bene-
fit from their expertise in property acquisition, development, and leasing with-
out needing to handle them yourself.
Accessibility —REITs allow small investors to gain exposure to real estate with-
out requiring significant capital investments. You can invest in a wide range of
property types (e.g., residential, commercial, industrial) with minimal cost.
Tax benefits —While dividends from REITs are typically taxed as ordinary
income, some REIT dividends may qualify for the 20% pass-through deduction
under US tax laws, reducing your effective tax rate.
A variety of options —REITs span different sectors, including health care, retail,
residential, and data centers, allowing you to tailor your portfolio to specific
real estate trends or needs.
Steady income streams —Many REITs generate predictable cash flows from long-
term leases or stable tenant relationships, making them a reliable source of
income.

112 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
We can also examine another company from our DataFrame, Exxon Mobil (XOM). At
the time of writing, Exxon has a high dividend yield (3.70%), and its dividend pay-
ments have grown over the years. A dividend investor might consider buying Exxon
with the idea that this company will keep growing, and, at the same time, the investors
will harvest solid dividend payments from the start that can grow above bond yields,
which we’ll look at next.
5.2 Bonds
If you own a share of a company, you can brag at parties that it’s partly yours. However,
those who are literate about investing won’t be impressed with your ownership of
Apple, NVIDIA, or any other company unless your portfolio has beaten the market
and you can be considered a master of capital appreciation.
 While dealing with stocks involves equity, the bond business model relates to debt.
In other words, bonds follow an IOU model: you lend money to someone, and the
borrower pays interest until they return the borrowed money in full. The basic princi-
ple of bonds is outlined in figure 5.3.
City wants to
build a bridge.City sells a 10-year
bond to raise money.
A private investor
purchases a bond.
The investor receives interest
payments until the principal is
repaid.
Figure 5.3 A plain vanilla bond

113 5.2 Bonds
Many attributes define a bond’s details, also called the indenture . Let’s look at the par-
ticulars affecting how you can lend money and benefit from that:
Borrower —The borrower refers to the party who receives the money. You can lend
money, for instance, to the federal government, municipalities, or companies.
Maturation date —This parameter defines the day the borrower must repay the
principal  (the total amount of borrowed money) to the lender. The time to
maturity of a bond at its emission can vary from months to decades.
Coupon payments —Eventually, a coupon rate is an investor’s annual payment
while holding a particular bond. Rates can also be floating or fixed, meaning
coupon rates may change over time for some bonds. 
Risk rating —A bond’s interest rate depends strongly on the borrower’s default
risk. The higher the risk, the higher the rate. Therefore, a third party needs to
evaluate the default risk. Figure 5.4 outlines the rating structure of Moody’s and
Standard & Poor (S&P), two rating agencies in the United States.
Payment modalities —For cash flow planning, investors must also know when they
get their payments. The payment modalities define, among other things, how
often and when the lender receives money. In many cases, coupon payments
are made quarterly.
In its simplest form, a vanilla bond  is an IOU with fixed coupon payment intervals and a
set maturation date. However, there are many variations. For instance, some bonds allow
borrowers to repay the principal in intervals alongside coupon payments, similar to how
mortgage payments work. Bonds can also be collateralized, meaning that if the bor-
rower defaults, an asset can be liquidated to repay the lender. This is akin to real estate
foreclosures, where a property is seized if the owner can’t keep up with payments. 
 While this book focuses on basic scenarios, it’s worth noting that more complex
variations of bonds are the subject of advanced certifications, such as the Chartered
Financial Analyst (CFA). The job of a rating agency is to evaluate bonds offered on the
bond market and to rate them. The higher the risk, the higher the returns an issuer
offers to attract possible lenders. Table 5.1 shows the rating categories of the three big
rating agencies in the United States.
Table 5.1 Rating of bonds
Rating tier Moody’s S&P Fitch Meaning
Investment Grade
Highest quality Aaa AAA AAA Prime credit quality, lowest 
risk
High quality Aa1, Aa2, Aa3 AA+, AA, AA- AA+, AA, AA- Very high credit quality
Upper medium 
gradeA1, A2, A3 A+, A, A- A+, A, A- Strong capacity to meet 
financial commitments

114 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
Chapter 1 highlights two standard ways to earn money through investment: passive
income and capital appreciation. As shown with bonds, coupon payments generate pas-
sive income. Bonds also offer the potential for capital appreciation. When issued, inves-
tors buy them on the primary market, where financial institutions act as intermediaries
between the borrower and lender, setting an initial price (known as the face value  or par
value ). Before the maturation date, bonds can be traded on the secondary market,
where their price fluctuates. If the price rises above the face value, the bond trades above
par; if it falls below, it trades below par. Buying a bond at a 5% discount to its face value
means that 5% contributes to your yield upon maturity when the principal is repaid.
Let’s explore fixed-income assets from the US Treasury as a reference example.
Depending on their durations, they are categorized as Treasury bills (maturing in up
to one year), Treasury notes (maturing in up to 10 years), or Treasury bonds (matur-
ing in more than 10 years). For further details, see https:/ /mng.bz/lZPR .
 Data can help identify bonds with projected yields higher than alternative invest-
ments. The Federal Reserve’s interest rate policies directly influence bond prices andLower medium 
gradeBaa1, Baa2, 
Baa3BBB+, BBB, 
BBB-BBB+, BBB, 
BBB-Adequate capacity, some 
susceptibility to conditions
Speculative grade
Upper 
speculativeBa, Ba, Ba3 BB+, BB, BB- BB+, BB, BB- Higher risk of default, but 
financial commitment met
Highly 
speculativeB1, B2, B3 B+, B, B- B+, B, B- Material default risk, but 
financial obligations still met
Substantial risk Caa1, Caa2, 
Caa3CCC+, CCC, 
CCC-CCC+, CCC, 
CCC-Very high risk, substantial 
vulnerability to default
Near default Ca CC, C CC, C Highly vulnerable to default
Default C D RD, D In default
Why selling bonds before the maturation date may not always be unwise
Common sense tells us that if we lend $10,000 to someone, selling the debt to a
third party for a smaller amount would be unwise. If we get our regular interest pay-
ments and principal back in full at maturity, why should we sell something for a loss?
Contemplating such scenarios brings us closer to thinking like economists and fore-
casting. Investors might sell bonds as the market changes, and the possible capital
appreciation of investing the money received by selling the bond below $10,000
might be higher than $10,000 plus all the coupon payments until then. Chapter 11
goes into detail about forecasting and making decisions based on forecasts.Table 5.1 Rating of bonds  (continued)
Rating tier Moody’s S&P Fitch Meaning

115 5.2 Bonds
yields. When the Fed raises rates, new bonds are issued with higher yields to match
prevailing rates, making existing bonds with lower yields less attractive and causing
their prices to drop. Conversely, when the Fed lowers rates, existing bonds with higher
yields become more appealing. Additionally, high interest rates increase default risks
for weaker borrowers. Understanding interest rate trends is crucial when deciding
between investing in stocks or bonds. The following code demonstrates how to collect
bond interest rates using the EODHD platform introduced in chapter 3:
import requests
def fetch(country_code):
    url = 
f’https://eodhd.com/api/eod/{country_code}.GBOND?api_token={eod_api_key}
&fmt=json’
    return requests.get(url).json()
import pandas as pd
us = pd.DataFrame(data=fetch("US10Y"))
We can now plot the results and explore the outcome. Looking at the rates when plot-
ting the graph, we can reason that investing in a bond would have been a better deci-
sion than in previous times, as shown in figure 5.4:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
p = us[["date", "adjusted_close"]]
p.set_index("date", inplace=True)
p.plot(figsize = (12,8), fontsize = 12)
plt.ylabel("Price (USD)")
plt.title("yield Price Chart", fontsize = 15)
plt.show()
Alternatively, we can analyze high-risk bonds, often referred to as junk bonds, and use
data to determine if some are undervalued relative to their ratings. Unfortunately, the
free EODHD version is limited and doesn’t provide corporate data. The following
code uses an alternative open platform to load data from an International Securities
Identification Number (ISIN), a bond identifier. The REST API returns the metadata
for the bond based on the input:
import requests
headers = {
    “Content-Type”: “application/json”,
    “X-OPENFIGI-APIKEY”: OPEN_FIGI_KEY
}
isin = "US36166NAJ28"  # Example ISIN
data = [{"idType": "ID_ISIN", "idValue": isin}]
response = requests.post("https://api.openfigi.com/v3/mapping",
                          headers=headers, json=data)
print(response.json())

116 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
This approach is highly speculative and may require insider knowledge. Another
speculative tool is the credit default swap  (CDS), which some readers may recognize from
the movie The Big Short.  A CDS acts as an insurance contract against bond default: you
pay an ongoing premium, and if the debtor defaults, the insurer compensates you for
the bond’s full value. Interestingly, CDS can be detached from the original lender. For
example, if A borrows money from B, C can purchase an insurance from D that is paid
to C when B defaults.
 Michael Burry famously used data to predict the 2007 financial crisis, betting on
the defaults of various collateralized debt obligations (CDOs)—packages of bundled
bonds. His foresight proved correct, showcasing how deep data analysis can uncover
opportunities and risks.
 While these advanced strategies offer potential, they are complex and risky. For
simplicity, bonds can still provide steady yields with lower risk than stocks. Data can
help determine whether dividend-paying stocks or bonds are better suited for passive
income. Next, we explore a third passive income option: cryptocurrency.
Figure 5.4 Return of US Treasury bonds

117 5.3 Crypto staking
5.3 Crypto staking
Most individuals who accumulated significant wealth through cryptocurrency did so
via capital appreciation. They invested in cryptocurrency at low prices during its
nascent stages or after one of its crashes and reaped substantial gains as its value
soared. Crypto enthusiasts argue that cryptocurrencies, with a few exceptions, have a
constant capital appreciation as a scarce resource. As there can never be more than 21
million BTC, the idea is that the value of Bitcoin will always increase. Consequently, if
you believe in the long-term value of crypto, there isn’t much more to say, as all you
need to do is wait for the right time to sell.
 This chapter focuses on strategies to generate passive income with cryptocurrency,
as there is still much to learn. But before that, we need to recap some crypto basics to
be able to invest.
5.3.1 Ledgers and exchanges
One thing enthusiasts and critics may agree on is the number of scams and the poten-
tial risks of losing money with crypto if you don’t know what you’re doing. Even if we
don’t go into speculative actions in this book, exploring some risk management basics
is necessary.
WARNING Knowledge of cryptocurrency reduces your risk of being a victim of
fraud or scam. However, the cryptocurrency industry is highly unregulated,
and even experienced crypto traders have lost considerable amounts of
money. Cryptocurrency is likely to remain a risky investment.
The term “lost cryptocurrencies,” as used by the media, can lead to misconceptions
because cryptocurrencies can’t be lost. However, crypto holders can lose their keys,
confirming their cryptocurrency ownership. We’ll explain this in detail by illustrating
how cryptocurrency works, as depicted in figure 5.5.
Exchange LedgerAccount Account
Figure 5.5 If you hold cryptocurrency on an exchange, the exchange owns the keys signing the 
transactions on the blockchain. Ledgers, such as cold wallets, provide ways to store the keys that 
signed the last transaction in a safe place. Be aware that cryptocurrency, a distributed transaction 
log, is a public blockchain and therefore never stored on your device or account.

118 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
In its simplest technical terms, blockchain is all about private keys that sign blocks of
an immutable, distributed transaction log during a transaction. Cryptocurrency mon-
etizes this principle. The more blocks are signed with your key, the more ownership
you have.
 We can use accounts on exchanges, such as Binance or OKX. For investors work-
ing with brokers, using an exchange seems like having a brokerage account from a
bird’s-eye view. Exchanges invest to ensure that your account on their platform is as
safe as possible from attacks by hackers. They will encourage—or even enforce—all
kinds of account protection mechanisms, such as multifactor authentication. Their
user interfaces are user-friendly, aiming to make it easy to buy and sell cryptocurrency.
 However, we need to go into more detail to understand the problems many inves-
tors see with an exchange. Exchanges enable you to trigger transactions using your
user account; however, the exchanges sign the transaction with their keys, which is the
source of the slogan “Not your keys, not your coins.” Most cryptocurrency exchanges
reside in countries where it’s difficult to regulate them. The risks of this lack of regula-
tion have become apparent with the FTX scandal, in which the company misused the
investments of private investors, and its principal founder, Sam Bankman-Fried,
became a symbol of crypto fraud.
 To completely control your crypto investments, you need to be in control of the
keys that are used for transactions. You can store your keys on your physical devices (a
hardware ledger or cold wallet) or on software service providers who provide you with
the keys (a software ledger or warm wallet). The concept is the same: crypto transac-
tions are signed, but in the case of a ledger, transactions are signed with your key. You
still need to protect your keys, but you’ve vastly reduced your exposure to market risks
(namely, that the value of your cryptocurrency might go down) and cyberattacks on
the blockchain.
5.3.2 Mining and staking
Crypto user forums are flooded with offers on how to get rich with crypto, and many
scams lure people into highly speculative and risky ways to make money. Mining and
staking are two forms of passive income that can also appeal to risk-aware investors.
Let’s explore these two options.
 Mining  involves using computational power to validate transactions on a block-
chain network. This approach is also called a Proof-of-Work (PoW) consensus mecha-
nism. If the machines in your mining farms solve a complex mathematical problem,
you receive some cryptocurrency. While it can be lucrative, mining requires significant
up-front investment in hardware and incurs ongoing electricity costs. The profitability
depends on factors such as the cryptocurrency mined, mining difficulty, and local
electricity rates.
 Staking  allows crypto holders to lock up their assets in a blockchain network to sup-
port its operations, such as validating transactions. In return, stakers earn rewards, often
as additional tokens. This method, also called the Proof-of-Stake (PoS) consensus

119 5.3 Crypto staking
mechanism, is energy-efficient compared to mining using the previously mentioned
PoW mechanism. However, it requires holding a certain minimum amount of crypto-
currency. It involves the risk of token devaluation, which can be roughly compared
with inflation: the more tokens are created, the more the worth of existing tokens will
be reduced.
 Becoming a crypto entrepreneur may sound appealing to engineers. After all, they
can use their core strengths to build a moneymaking business. However, in many
cases, a substantial up-front investment is needed. Without investment in strong hard-
ware, there’s no mining, and mining is still expensive if your hardware is in a region
with high electricity prices. Staking can also be costly, but there are still some forms in
which you can create revenue while you hold your cryptocurrency for the long term.
Let’s look at these options.
5.3.3 Affordable staking options
Staking and validation mean your cryptocurrency is used to validate network transac-
tions with a PoS consensus mechanism. A validator node is a computer on the internet
representing existing cryptocurrency stakeholders. During a transaction, validators
are chosen randomly, based on stake size or other factors. Validators confirm transac-
tions, propose blocks, and add them to the blockchain. For this service, validators
earn rewards in the form of a minimal share of the transaction.
 In this process, individual investors can generate passive income with cryptocur-
rency. They can set up a validator node to validate transactions. Being in control of a
validator often means a significant investment. To provide a validator for Ethereum,
you need to stake at least 32 ETH ( https:/ /ethereum.org/en/staking/ ). This is a sub-
stantial up-front investment. If ETH is priced above $3,000, the initial investment
exceeds $100,000. 
 The easier alternative is to delegate your cryptocurrency to a third-party validator.
The validator will provide you with rewards but will take a commission, reducing your
rewards compared to running your node; this approach avoids the substantial time
and financial commitments of setting up and maintaining validator hardware and
software. Hardware ledgers typically offer software to manage positions, such as Led-
ger Live or Trezor Suite. To stake your cryptocurrency on a hardware ledger, simply
follow the instructions as shown in the supplier’s software to manage your crypto
investments. Please be aware that cryptocurrency is largely unregulated, and there are
fraud risks when you stake coins. 
Are stable coins the safest way to passive income using cryptocurrency?
When considering staking rewards, some cryptocurrencies offer exceptionally high
returns. For example, networks such as Cosmos (ATOM) and Polkadot (DOT), which
act as bridges between blockchains, can provide staking rewards of up to 20%. How-
ever, calling this a guaranteed income is misleading. Tokens that provide high-stakes

120 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
So, how much can you earn through staking? One challenge is that staking rewards
vary significantly depending on transaction value. It differs from interest payments of
bonds, where there are constant interest payments. Table 5.2. shows average staking
rewards over time.
Chapter 6 will show how to access your assets—stocks, ETFs, bonds, and crypto—
through a Python API. One specific challenge with using cold wallets is that they are
designed to limit access to protect you from hackers. Providing Python APIs to access
information related to cryptocurrency isn’t the primary use case for a hardware ledger
provider. Therefore, we’ll explain how to access Binance, although we want to empha-
size that many crypto investors advise against using exchanges to hold cryptocurrency.
NOTE As staking means providing cryptocurrencies for transactions, they can
also be locked for specific periods. Keep that in mind if you, in parallel, desire
to make money using day trading.
5.4 Early retirement
We can approach financial independence in two ways. One way is to accumulate
enough money to live off these reserves for the remainder of your life. For most, the
more likely path is to create a high enough passive income stream. By knowing your(continued)
rewards often have a high rate of devaluation. Consider the following common sce-
nario: Pierre buys 100 tokens at $7 each for $700 and earns 20% staking rewards.
If the token’s price drops to $5, Pierre’s 120 tokens, after collecting the rewards,
would only be worth $600, resulting in a $100 loss if sold.
Stablecoins present an alternative for staking, as their value is pegged to govern-
ment-issued currencies such as the US dollar. For instance, someone purchasing
100 USD Coin tokens at $1 each and earning a 10% staking reward would end up
with 110 tokens worth $110, potentially outperforming traditional bonds. However,
staking rewards are often volatile, and high returns aren’t guaranteed if the interest
rate fluctuates. Evaluating the risks and potential fluctuations in token value is
essential for anyone considering staking as an income strategy.
Table 5.2 Staking rewards
Cryptocurrency Average staking rewards (APY) in %
Ethereum (ETH) 4–6
Cardano (ADA) 4–6
Solana (SOL) 6–8
Polkadot (DOT) ~14
Avalanche (AVAX) 8–12

121 Summary
total annual expenses, you can calculate the money needed for financial indepen-
dence using a simple formula: divide your yearly costs by your expected return rate.
While this formula ignores factors such as inflation and safety margin, a reasonable
estimate for a low-risk yield is around 5%.
NOTE If you plan to retire through passive income by investing all of your
money in an account that returns a 5% interest rate per year, which covers
exactly your yearly expenses, please consider the inflation and other factors
that may affect your spending. The average inflation rate in the United States
from 1975 to 2024 was 3.5%.
Many financial advisors recommend adjusting your investment strategy with age. As
you age, shifting toward assets that provide passive income becomes more common.
This is partly because growth portfolios yield higher long-term returns than fixed-
income investments. For example, the Vanguard S&P 500 ETF (VOO) has demon-
strated a 10-year growth rate of 192.20% as of January 2025. Similarly, the iShares
MSCI World ETF (URTH), which invests globally, achieved a return of 123.40% over
the same period. Both outperform most high-fixed-income portfolios and offer divi-
dends in addition to growth.
 This underscores a timeless principle emphasized by value investors such as Char-
lie Munger and Warren Buffett: patience is one of the greatest virtues in investing.
Through the power of compounding, those who adhere to sound principles and
maintain a disciplined approach can achieve significant wealth over time.
 Still, even if you’re the most patient person on earth, remember that there’s no
universal investment strategy for everyone. If you consider retiring, whether at a
younger or older age, projected long-term returns that have yet to materialize won’t
pay your bills. In the worst-case scenario, growth assets with the potential for high
returns might even evaporate. Even if you bet on stable companies, it’s a problem if
you need money in a bear market and must sell at a lower price than in a bull market.
Summary
Some companies pay dividends to shareholders, making them a potential source
of passive income.
Typically, larger, more mature companies with limited growth opportunities
offer higher dividends. These companies are often classified as “cash cows” in
the BSG Growth-Share Matrix.
Investors can evaluate dividend-paying stocks using metrics such as payout ratio,
dividend growth rate, annual payment, and dividend yield.
Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) are specialized investment vehicles that
generate passive income, primarily through property-related investments.
Bonds are fixed-income assets where investors lend money to an entity (e.g.,
government, municipality, or corporation) in exchange for interest payments.
At maturity, the principal is returned to the lender.

122 CHAPTER  5Income portfolios
Payment modalities, such as interest rates and payout frequencies, might vary
per bond, and investors must carefully study them when making investment
decisions.
Bond classifications specifically for US Treasury bonds include Treasury bills,
which mature in under 1 year; Treasury notes, which mature between 1 and 10
years; and Treasury bonds, which mature in over 10 years.
Central bank interest rates, like those set by the Federal Reserve, significantly
affect bond values. Riskier bonds offer higher yields, as assessed by rating agencies.
In a very simplified view, cryptocurrency works based on signing blocks during
a transaction with a private key. If you don’t own that key, you don’t own the
cryptocurrency.
Cryptocurrency is controversial and has sparked many debates. The best way for
a newbie to understand the arguments of both sides is to research the details
first before forming an opinion.
Whether you’re an enthusiast or a critic, be aware of many scams involving
crypto.
Cryptocurrency offers several passive income opportunities, with staking being
among the most accessible. By staking, your cryptocurrency supports transac-
tion validation.
Staking rewards can fluctuate, and cryptocurrencies are susceptible to scams
and fraud. Avoid holding assets on exchanges to minimize risks and use secure
cold storage options such as hardware wallets.
While passive income strategies offer stability, growth stocks typically outper-
form them over time due to compounding returns and capital appreciation.
Many see 5% as a realistic value for a passive income. Still, if you have high infla-
tion and other unexpected expenses, it might take longer to retire early and say
goodbye to corporate life forever.

123Building an asset monitor
In the previous chapters, we showed how to select assets for possible investments.
Assuming you might have already bought assets, it’s time to show you how to moni-
tor existing portfolios. This chapter is about staying in control, staying informed,
and maximizing the potential returns of your assets.
 First, we’ll walk you through collecting your holdings from various brokers.
Next, we’ll aggregate this data into clear, actionable insights: tracking your total
passive income, identifying standout performers (both positive and negative), and
uncovering areas for improvement. Finally, we’ll project your future earnings and
growth to answer the big question: When will you hit your financial milestones?This chapter covers
Collecting portfolio data from online and offline 
sources
Analyzing asset performance in a portfolio
Projecting future returns from assets and 
portfolios
Creating monthly reports on passive income 
and gains
Collecting data in a Google Sheets document

124 CHAPTER  6Building an asset monitor
 We gather data using Google Sheets, enabling us to visualize our information, fil-
ter it, and delve deeper into the details. Let’s uncover the secrets to managing your
stock portfolio like a pro. Ready to level up? Let’s get started.
NOTE The Git repository and the download sections contain a full-function-
ing Jupyter Notebook. The code snippets in this book help to understand the
code, but not every helper variable is declared in the listings in the book. You
can also refer to the appendix to learn about the required Python libraries.
6.1 Architecture
In this chapter, we’ll build a data science notebook to consolidate information about
your holdings from various sources into a central repository. We aim to track key met-
rics, including the current portfolio value and projected annual returns from capital
appreciation and passive income. As illustrated in figure 6.1, we’ll extract data for
each asset category and export it to dedicated worksheets, allowing you to view stocks,
crypto, bonds, and other asset types in separate spreadsheet tabs.
This chapter will gather data from two stockbrokers and one cryptocurrency exchange
as a demonstration portfolio. Even if you use different platforms, the provided code
samples can serve as templates for building custom data pipelines to collect informa-
tion from your broker.
 Hundreds of institutions and products, such as banks, brokers, exchanges, and
crypto wallets, offer you the ability to store assets worldwide. Unfortunately, they don’t
use a single standard to provide you with access to your portfolio using code. Some of
them may not offer access at all that supports automated data retrieval.
 Figure 6.2 illustrates the data extraction challenge: while some assets can be
retrieved from multiple platforms, others may not be accessible via API. To address
this, we merge online data with manually tracked holdings. An exception arises with
Figure 6.1 Data Flow from asset data to 
worksheets in a Google Sheets document

125 6.1 Architecture
an asset with no digital footprint, such as real estate. Entering these details manually
into a spreadsheet may be the most practical approach.
Let’s create a table to track all holdings without automated data retrieval, named
offline_asset . The Jupyter Notebook, available for download at the publisher’s web-
site, uses an SQLite database as file-based storage, which is ideal for demonstration
and exploration. These notebooks may declare some variables that aren’t listed in
the examples. 
 Following is the Data Definition Language (DDL) statement for the database table
you need to execute in a SQL console connected to the database. In the appendix,
we’ll provide some guidelines for those who aren’t familiar with SQLite. In the code
repository, we also have a small reference database with some prefilled datasets. If you
start working with your data, you also need to fill in these tables with additional entries
that reflect your portfolio.
create table main.offline_asset
(
    ticker        TEXT
        constraint InterestTable_pk
            primary key,
    yield         REAL,
    avg_price     REAL,
    exchange      TEXT,
    amount        REAL,
    asset_type    TEXT
);
We use the ticker as a unique identifier. Even if we occasionally forget the company
name behind that ticker, we can collect all the required data once we uniquely iden-
tify the asset. We use the yield  column for passive income from assets such as bonds,
stocks with dividend payments, or cryptos with staking options. The avg_price  col-
umn reflects the weighted average price of all past purchases.
 We also track where we hold an asset in the exchange  column and record the
shares we own in the amount  column. Finally, we need the asset_type  column to iden-
tify the asset type, such as stock, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), crypto, or bond.Ol nni e
Soeuc srOl nni e
Soeuc srOnline
Sources
Data for
Oﬄine AssetsData Containing Assets
Figure 6.2 Collecting online sources 
into DataFrames

126 CHAPTER  6Building an asset monitor
 Once the table is created, we must add our position as a dataset. The following
command loads the offline data into a DataFrame with a one-liner. We’ll later merge
the content of this DataFrame with the data collected from brokers and exchanges:
all_offline_assets = pd.read_sql('offline_asset', engine, index_col='ticker')
This chapter’s complete notebook can be downloaded from the publisher’s website.
The chapter will explain essential data extraction, transformation, and export code.
6.2 The spreadsheet
Before describing the logic, let’s look at the expected outcome. We export data into a
spreadsheet, and you can download a template from https:/ /mng.bz/Bzyl . Clone this
template, and set up the appropriate permissions to access the spreadsheet. After-
ward, you can download a JSON file containing all the required parameters to access
the Google Sheet document online. Once you’ve set this up correctly, including refer-
ences to this file in your source code, you can export the financial data into the work-
sheets using the code we’ll introduce in this chapter. Alternatively, you can download
a Microsoft Excel file from the download section and convert it to a Google Sheets
document. The file is also available in the book’s GitHub repository ( https:/ /github
.com/StefanPapp/investing-for-programmers ).
 Let’s explore what the worksheets will look like. Figure 6.3 shows a screenshot fea-
turing reference data on stocks. Note that each ticker is part of a portfolio, and you
can filter by each column. We display the number of shares we own for a ticker, the
total value, and the expected yearly yield. We also calculated potential losses or gains
in two columns. The Live column represents real-time data gathered through cell for-
mulas that pull information from Google Finance. While the Value column represents
the total value of a position at the time of export, we can also track changes since the
last update with live data.
Figure 6.4 shows the overview page of this spreadsheet template called “assets,” which
also contains some reference data. On this worksheet, we sum up the value and yields
of all assets. The graph shows the asset type distribution, giving you a good overview
of your distribution. You can see right away, for instance, that this reference dataset
Figure 6.3 A reference example of the Google Sheets worksheet with stock information

127 6.3 Extracting data
represents a perilous portfolio as most risk-averse investors would prefer to have a far
higher distribution on index funds, which are held as ETFs.
 We’ll now demonstrate how to collect data, extract essential metrics, convert all
values to a single currency (in case we hold assets in different currencies), and export
that data to a Google Sheet. Let’s get started!
6.3 Extracting data
Stockbrokers facilitate the trading and holding of assets for investors. This book exam-
ines two brokers that offer Python APIs for accessing account balances: Alpaca and
Interactive Brokers. Unlike many brokers restricted to specific countries, both provide
services internationally, making them accessible to readers around the globe. Remem-
ber that registering with a broker requires identification, such as a passport, as well as
information about your tax residency. This procedure is known as Know Your Cus-
tomer (KYC) and is mandatory for the investment services industry. In the appendix,
we’ll provide more insights about brokers.
NOTE Take time to research a broker. Many brokers restrict their services to a
few countries. Higher or lower order and transfer fees may affect gains and
losses. If you want to automate, be aware that not every broker offers APIs to
their clients. Validate that every broker is serious. If you’re in doubt, inquire
about the broker with a financial advisor.
To process data from various sources, we need to store it in a unified format and
merge it. Therefore, we must define the target data structure for our DataFrames.
Let’s examine the required attributes:
Ticker —The stock symbol that serves as a unique identifier.
Number of shares —The total number of shares currently held.
Figure 6.4 Overview worksheet with assets grouped by value (USD column) and passive income (Yield column)

128 CHAPTER  6Building an asset monitor
Average price —The average purchase price aggregated for all transactions.
Exchange —The exchange on which the asset is traded.
Broker —A constant value to identify the data source. In our case, this will be
either INTERACTIVE_BROKER  or ALPACA .
6.3.1 Alpaca: A developer-first broker
Alpaca markets itself as a developer-first broker, offering modern APIs designed for
seamless integration into your workflows. To use the Alpaca platform, you’ll need an
account, and you must generate access keys on this account. These keys enable pro-
grammatic access to your account for tasks such as retrieving balances or executing
trades.
 For this book’s showcase, we use the dotenv library to load the keys securely from a
plain text .env file. Be cautious if you use this library! 
WARNING Avoid storing sensitive information on shared or unsecured com-
puters. Stolen keys can lead to unauthorized actions that could compromise
your account. 
Ensure the .env file contains your keys in this format:
ALPACA_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
ALPACA_SECRET_KEY=your_secret_key_here
Once your environment is correctly configured, listing 6.1 demonstrates how to con-
nect to Alpaca using the py-alpaca library. After creating the trading_client  object,
we call the get_all_position()  method to load every dataset into the DataFrame. We
also select the columns to create a data structure that can be merged with the data
from other brokers. Install the Python package for Alpaca via pip install  alpaca-py.
from alpaca.trading.client import TradingClient 
ALPACA_KEY = os.getenv("ALPACA_API_KEY")             
ALPACA_SECRET = os.getenv("ALPACA_SECRET_KEY")       
trading_client = TradingClient(ALPACA_KEY, ALPACA_SECRET, paper=False)
positions_data = [
    [position.symbol, position.qty, 
     position.avg_entry_price, 
     position.exchange.value, 'ALPACA']                  
    for position in trading_client.get_all_positions()   
]
alpaca_balances = pd.DataFrame(                          
    positions_data,                                      
    columns=[COL_TICKER, COL_AMOUNT, COL_PRICE_INIT, 
             COL_EXCHANGE, COL_BROKER])                  Listing 6.1 Extracting data from Alpaca
Collects the secrets 
from a local .env file
Collects data 
through the method 
get_all_positions()

129 6.3 Extracting data
If you don’t want to invest real money and want to experiment, you can also use
Alpaca’s paper accounts by setting the parameter paper  to true . You can see a paper
account as a test environment for investing.
NOTE Alpaca only supports US dollars as currency. Although transferring
money in any currency to Alpaca is possible, remember that international
transfers that convert currency can be expensive. Investors often must also
wait days for the funds to arrive. You can transfer cryptocurrency to bypass
currency conversion and convert your crypto tokens to USD on Alpaca.
6.3.2 Interactive Brokers: A legacy powerhouse with a modern twist
Founded in 1978, Interactive Brokers has built a reputation as a feature-rich platform
for investors. However, some programmers find its approach to integrating APIs a bit
old-school. Unlike modern cloud-based brokers, Interactive Brokers requires install-
ing a local application, the Trader Workstation (TWS), to access data through a
Python API. APIs connect to this workstation, adding complexity for developers build-
ing cloud-based investment solutions.
 That said, once set up correctly, Interactive Brokers offers powerful tools for
retrieving and managing investment data. With the ib_insync library, you can con-
nect to the TWS programmatically. Note that, depending on your configuration,
you must adjust some settings in the TWS. We’ll add more details in the appendix.
Listing 6.2 shows how to retrieve data using this library. We collect the data for our
positions by calling the positions()  method. We unwrap the data from the
returned data structure and ensure that we have all the data in the same structure as
the data from Alpaca. 
from ib_insync import *    
util.startLoop()           
ib =  IB()                 
ib.connect()               
ibr = util.df(ib.positions())               
ibr[COL_TICKER] = (ibr.contract.apply
                   (lambda x: x.symbol))    
ibr["exchange"] = (ibr.contract.apply
                   (lambda x: x.exchange))  
ibr["broker"] = "INTERACTIVE_BROKER"        
IB_balances = (ibr[[COL_TICKER, 'position', 'avgCost', 
                   COL_EXCHANGE, COL_BROKER]].
               rename(columns={'position': COL_AMOUNT, 
                               'avgCost': COL_PRICE_INIT}))Listing 6.2 Extracting data from Interactive Brokers
Connects to the local 
TraderWorkstation
Collects data through 
ib.positions()

130 CHAPTER  6Building an asset monitor
6.4 Enriching data
We now have data in two DataFrames containing information from two brokers
arranged in the same data structures. Additionally, we have a DataFrame that includes
offline assets. We can merge them as shown here:
all_positions_raw = pd.concat([alpaca_balances, IB_balances, offline_assets])
All the information from our data sources is now consolidated into one DataFrame.
We’ve completed the data extraction.
 We aim to use the tickers in the all_positions_raw  DataFrame as identifiers to
obtain financial data from Yahoo Finance and Google Finance. We must complete
one remaining task before merging the data from our holdings with information from
this platform. In most instances, the tickers that brokers provide align with those
found on financial platforms. However, exceptions do exist. For example, shares of
Berkshire Hathaway with the ticker BRK.B are identified as BRK-B on Yahoo Finance.
We can create a lookup table that maps broker tickers to those used on financial plat-
forms to prevent issues arising from mismatched tickers.
 We’ll also use this table to map each asset to a portfolio. This allows an investor to
group similar assets, which can be crucial when filtering and comparing performances on
a more abstract level. Following is a list of the five columns we need for this lookup table:
Ticker —The broker’s unique identifier for a stock
Asset type —The type of asset (here, stocks; different types of assets will be col-
lected later)
Portfolio —The portfolio the asset belongs to
Yahoo —The ticker name on Yahoo Finance
Google —The ticker name on Google Finance
One of the simplest techniques for demonstration purposes is again using SQLite to
store these values. We can create a table for the asset lookup using DDL and SQL
commands:
create table main.asset_lookup
(
    ticker    TEXT not null
        constraint base_security_pk
            primary key,
    asset_type TEXT not null,
    portfolio TEXT,
    yahoo     TEXT,
    google    TEXT
);
When we populate this table with data from our holdings, we can retain NULL values
for the yahoo  and google  columns if there are no discrepancies between the data
from brokers and the corresponding financial platform. Listing 6.3 illustrates how to
load data from a local SQLite database. Once loaded, these columns are combined

131 6.5 Processing assets
with all_positions_raw , which contains our positions in memory. We also populate
all identifiers with the ticker  column value if there is no mismatch between tickers.
In other words, assuming we’ve stored “BRK-B” for Yahoo Finance, we end up with a
mapping between BRK.B (for the ticker  column) and BRK-B (for the yahoo  col-
umn). If the yahoo  or google  columns are null, we populate them with the value in
the ticker  column. Note that you must fill in all the rows with data representing your
portfolios to work with this lookup table for your positions.
from sqlalchemy import create_engine
engine = create_engine('sqlite:///portfolio.sqlite')
asset_lookup = pd.read_sql('asset_lookup', 
                            engine, 
                            index_col=COL_TICKER)    
all_positions = all_positions_raw.merge(asset_lookup, on=COL_TICKER)
all_positions[COL_YAHOO] = (all_positions[COL_YAHOO].
                            fillna(
    all_positions[COL_TICKER]))                                
all_positions[COL_GOOGLE] = (all_positions[COL_GOOGLE].fillna(
    all_positions[COL_TICKER]))                                
Finally, we can start processing data. The function collect_fin_data , as shown here,
expects a list of tickers and returns an object with all company information for the assets:
def collect_fin_data(tickers):
    return {ticker: yf.Ticker(ticker).info for ticker in tickers}
If you pass a long list, the query might run for a couple seconds as the Ticker  function
in the loop downloads data from Yahoo Finance for multiple assets.
6.5 Processing assets
Now that we’ve enriched data, it’s time to go into further detail and show how to
aggregate data for assets. The section on stocks will also show you how to convert
assets held in different currencies to a unified currency, which can also be applied to
other assets.
6.5.1 Stocks
The following code extracts stocks and collects all information using the collect_
fin_data  method. We filter the stocks from our data collection for all our assets and
collect the data for the companies:
shares = all_positions[all_positions[COL_ASSET_TYPE].isin(["STOCK"])]
unique_stock_tickers = shares[COL_YAHOO].unique().tolist()
yfin_data_stocks = collect_fin_info(unique_stock_tickers)Listing 6.3 Loading metadata
Loads data 
from SQLite
Fills NULL values 
with ticker data

132 CHAPTER  6Building an asset monitor
We now have Yahoo data for all of our stocks in the DataFrame yfin_data , which
allows us to merge relevant attributes into the DataFrame holding our shares. The
function merge_fin_data , shown in listing 6.4, extracts the desired metrics we pass as
a parameter.
def merge_fin_data (df_orig, ticker_data, metrics):
    df = df_orig.copy(deep=True)
    for m in metrics:
        df[m] = None
    for ind in df.index:
        ticker_symbol = df.loc[ind, "yahoo"]           
        company = ticker_data.get(ticker_symbol, {})   
        for m in metrics:                            
            df.loc[ind, m] = company.get(m, None)    
    return df
ratios = ["currentPrice", "targetMeanPrice", "dividendRate"]
stocks = merge_fin_data(shares, yfin_data_stocks, ratios)
One challenge can be different currencies. For example, an individual investor might
hold Microsoft shares, listed on NASDAQ, in US dollars; in parallel, he might hold
BMW shares, listed on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange (FSE), in euros. Converting all
positions into a single currency helps sum up the total value of our assets. The code
in listing 6.5 provides us with a method for conversion using the Python library
CurrencyConverter. Note that we need to agree on a target currency. In the code, we
map the exchange—each exchange trades money in its country’s currency—to the US
dollar as the target currency by default.
NOTE Some investors try to avoid different currencies as they add additional
risks through fluctuations in exchange rates. There are also special types of
stocks called American Depositary Receipts (ADR) that allow a foreign com-
pany to list on a local exchange. However, this isn’t available for all assets.
A showcase mapping can only contain a minimum set of exchanges, such as Euronext
Amsterdam (AEB) or Vienna Stock Exchange (VSE). Extend this list to include any
exchanges you might be using that aren’t covered by the mapping.
from currency_converter import CurrencyConverter
def get_conversion(target_currency = "USD"):
    c = CurrencyConverter()
    mapping_exchange_currency = {     Listing 6.4 Merging Yahoo Finance data into DataFrames
Listing 6.5 Converting currencyGets the symbol 
from the DataFrame
Adds desired metrics 
to the DataFrame
Sets up the 
mapping

133 6.5 Processing assets
        'ARCA': c.convert(1, 'USD', target_currency),
        'NASDAQ': c.convert(1, 'USD', target_currency),
        'NYSE': c.convert(1, 'USD', target_currency),
        'BATS': c.convert(1, 'USD', target_currency),
        'PINK': c.convert(1, 'USD', target_currency),
        'IBIS': c.convert(1, 'EUR', target_currency),
        'AEB': c.convert(1, 'EUR', target_currency),
        'VSE': c.convert(1, 'EUR', target_currency),
        'AMEX': c.convert(1, 'USD', target_currency),
        'BVME': c.convert(1, 'EUR', target_currency),
        'SBF': c.convert(1, 'EUR', target_currency),
        'EBS': c.convert(1, 'CHF', target_currency),
        'CPH': c.convert(1, 'DKK', target_currency),
        'PRA': c.convert(1, 'CZK', target_currency)
    }
    return mapping_exchange_currency
conversion = get_conversion()    
Once this is set up, we can convert all columns with different currencies into one stan-
dardized currency. The code in listing 6.6 converts the following parameters of an
asset into a single currency:
Current price
Average price
Dividend rate
Let’s examine the code in the listing to perform the conversion. We pass the column
name containing values in different currencies as a parameter for this conversion. In
this code sample, we convert the initial price, current price, and yield into US dollars.
def convert(row, column_name):
    return (row[column_name] * 
            conversion[row[COL_EXCHANGE]])                    
df[COL_PRICE_INIT_USD] = df.apply(convert, 
                                  column_name=COL_PRICE_INIT, 
                                  axis=1)                     
df[COL_PRICE_USD] = df.apply(convert, 
                             column_name=col_price, 
                             axis=1)                    
df[COL_YIELD_USD] = df.apply(convert, 
                             column_name=col_yield, 
                             axis=1)                    
The information in the DataFrame is per single share. Listing 6.7 shows how to aggre-
gate values based on the number of shares we own. As we likely have more than one
share for each position, we must multiply the values, such as price or yield, by the
number of shares to get a position’s total value and yield. Based on the price estima-
tions, we can also calculate past and potential future gains and losses. Listing 6.6 Executing conversionSpecifies USD as 
the target currency
Maps the 
conversion to the 
exchange column
Gets a single currency 
from a field

134 CHAPTER  6Building an asset monitor
df[COL_TOT_INIT_VALUE] = (df[COL_AMOUNT] * df[COL_PRICE_INIT_USD]).round(2)
df[COL_TOT_VALUE] = (df[COL_AMOUNT] * df[COL_PRICE_USD]).round(2)
df[COL_TOT_YIELD] = df[COL_AMOUNT] * df[COL_YIELD_USD]
df[COL_PAST_GAIN] = df[COL_TOT_VALUE] - df[COL_TOT_INIT_VALUE]
df[COL_PROJ_GAIN] = ((df[COL_TARGET_PRICE] - df[COL_PRICE_USD]) *
df[COL_AMOUNT])
Because we have all the data we need, it’s time to export it to a Google Sheets docu-
ment. We’ll use the gspread library for this purpose. It’s essential to establish the nec-
essary permissions to write to that document. Numerous guides online explain how to
set up access to Google Sheets for applications. Ultimately, you’ll obtain a JSON file
containing the key required for authentication.
 Additionally, safeguard your access key. Although someone accessing a spreadsheet
with your investments might not lead to financial loss, it’s still concerning to think that
unauthorized individuals could gain insight into your investment portfolios.
 Once the security is properly set up, we export all data to a worksheet called stock.
The code provided here includes two methods. The first method accepts the work-
sheet name and the data from the worksheet, and the second method then exports
that data:
def export_df_to_sheet(worksheet_name, df):
    worksheet = get_spreadsheet().worksheet(worksheet_name)
    worksheet.update([df.columns.values.tolist()] + df.values.tolist())Listing 6.7 Aggregating values
Perspectives on a portfolio
We can analyze changes in various ways. Assume Jeff purchased 10 shares of Com-
pany A for $100 each ($1,000) and 100 shares of Company B for $5 each ($500).
Now, let’s consider the current prices of both shares. Company A is priced at $130,
while Company B is at $7.50. Jeff’s value has increased significantly, showing a gain
of $300 with Company A and $250 with Company B. Strictly speaking, he achieved
a 30% gain with Company A and a 50% gain with Company B. If he had invested
$1,000 in Company B and $500 in Company A, his return would have been $650
instead of $550.
One approach to investing wisely might be to gain multiple perspectives on assets.
If you want to feel great, observing a successful bullish day on the stock exchange
and the overall increase in your portfolio’s value can provide the emotional boost you
desire. Having $5,000 more than the previous day feels more substantial than a 3%
increase. However, when assessing stock performance, the key is to focus on per-
centage changes. This method allows for better stock comparisons.
Remember to look at different time frames. Sometimes, the short-term performance
of a stock looks far gloomier than if you look at the stock’s performance in the long
run. Whatever you want to analyze, all the data is available. All you need to do is
decide what to focus on.

135 6.5 Processing assets
Extracting a DataFrame into a Google sheet is simple, but listing 6.8 shows how to add
live data. In this method, we assemble a cell function for a cell in Google Sheets that
collects data live from Google Finance using the ticker as an identifier. First, we need
to find a column character position based on the position in the table. So, if, for
instance, the “total value” is in the fourth position, we would get the character D.
Then, we parse through all the tickers, create the cell function, and export it to the
dedicated cell identified by the column position and the iteration counter through
the ticker array.
col_amount_character = (get_char_by_col_pos
                        (pos_col_amount))      
col_tot_val_character = (get_char_by_col_pos
                        (pos_col_tot_val))     
col_live_character = (get_char_by_col_pos
                     (pos_col_live))           
col_update_character = (get_char_by_col_pos
                       (pos_col_live+1))       
update_cols = []
counter = 0
for ticker in tickers:
    update_cols.append(f'=GOOGLEFINANCE("{ticker}")*'
                       f'{col_amount_character}'
                       f'{counter+2}')         
    counter += 1
worksheet.update([update_cols],
                  col_live_character + "2", 
                  raw=False, 
                  major_dimension = "COLUMNS" )   
Exporting stocks to the worksheet gives us a solid foundation to export additional
assets. We can reuse some of the code developed for stocks. Let’s explore how to pro-
cess ETFs, bonds, and cryptocurrency positions and export them to your spreadsheet.
6.5.2 Exchange-traded funds
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) are identified by a symbol or ticker, such as VOO for the
Vanguard S&P 500 or SPY for the SPDR S&P 500 Trust. Price updates occur during
the exchange’s opening hours. ETFs also sometimes pay dividends to shareholders.
 You can collect ETF data with yfinance using the same interface as stocks. The
ratios provided by the interface are slightly different. A yfinance ticker object for
stocks (a single company) provides results different from pooled investments (many
assets). The price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio returned by the methods of the object that
has loaded MSFT reflects data from Microsoft. If we load Vanguard S&P 500 data
identified by VOO into a ticker object, the P/E ratio will represent the weighted aver-
age of all P/E ratios of the assets pooled in that ETF.Listing 6.8 Adding live data
Gets column 
positions
Assembles cell 
function for 
export
Updates 
worksheets

136 CHAPTER  6Building an asset monitor
 Let’s collect and export all ETFs to a new worksheet in the spreadsheet. We can
reuse the merge_value_into_df  function to enrich the data we collected from the
brokers with yfinance data. The ratio navPrice  represents the current market value of
an ETF, and yield refers to the passive income that is paid out: 
all_etfs_held = all_ positions[all_positions['asset_type'].isin(["ETF"])]
full_etf_data = all_etf["yahoo"].unique().tolist()
essential_etf_data = merge_values_into_df(all_etfs_held, 
                                          full_etf_data, 
                                          ["navPrice", "yield"])
After collecting all ETFs, we can convert the currency to a valuation by a single cur-
rency. It works the same way with stocks, as shown earlier in listing 6.6. In addition,
aggregating and exporting work similarly. As we’ve encapsulated the code into a func-
tion (see listing 6.9), the code to process ETFs is reduced to a few lines.
all_etfs_held = all_positions[all_positions['asset_type'].isin(["ETF"])]
yfin_data_etf = collect_fin_data(all_etfs_held[COL_YAHOO].unique().tolist())Observe the fine-grained differences
Those with an eye for detail may be wondering why the metrics used in listing 6.4
(current prices and dividend rate) differ from those used for ETFs. On an abstract
level, they return the same information: What is the asset’s price now? What does
an investor get as passive income? 
These small details may help us create a greater awareness of the nature of an asset
through the programmer’s lens, shaped by modeling the world through object-oriented
programming. An ETF is a pooled investment containing various asset types, such as
stocks, bonds, or other ETFs. A programmer might refer to it as an array containing
objects of different asset types. Each asset in the ETF can generate passive income.
While dividends (from stocks) and coupon payments (from bonds) yield the same out-
come for investors (in the most abstract sense, the asset returns money), they differ
significantly in detail. A dividend  is a voluntary payment made by a company, which
can influence the share price when paid out. Many investors expect companies to
continue paying dividends, but a company may choose not to pay them.
In contrast, a coupon payment  is a mandatory disbursement that a borrower must
make to bondholders. Thus, yield is the abstraction of dividends and interest pay-
ments. The same principle applies to net asset value (NAV) and the current price,
as the NAV reflects the average of an asset when aggregating the current prices of
the assets.
In the spreadsheet, however, we call all returns yield at the abstracted level; the
focus is on determining how much passive income we’ll likely make. As we also call
staking rewards from crypto yields, we must know that this value can fluctuate wildly
if we have a cryptocurrency with strong price fluctuations.
Listing 6.9 Exporting ETFs

137 6.5 Processing assets
etf_info = merge_fin_data(all_etfs_held, yfin_data_etf, ["navPrice", "yield"])
etf_info = calculating_price_data(etf_info, "navPrice", "yield")
export_etf_columns = [COL_TICKER, COL_PORTFOLIO, 
                      COL_TOT_VALUE, COL_TOT_YIELD, 
                      COL_AMOUNT, COL_TOT_INIT_VALUE]
export_df_to_sheet(COL_WORKSHEET_ETF, etf_info[export_etf_columns])
add_live_data(COL_WORKSHEET_ETF, 
              etf_info[COL_GOOGLE].tolist(), 
              export_etf_columns)
One of the beautiful aspects of using libraries such as yfinance is that, ultimately, you
can encapsulate a lot of functionality and easily add new assets if they share the same
interface. We need to recognize that we should view ETFs differently than stocks, as
specific metrics that apply to a single stock can’t be easily aggregated for pooled
investments.
 Figure 6.5 outlines the worksheet for ETFs with sample data. Be aware that some
data, such as projected target price, is missing because it can’t be obtained through
yfinance.
6.5.3 Bonds
If you buy stocks, you’ll recognize companies by their ticker symbols. So, after some
experience, you might refer to holdings as MSFT, AAPL, or NVDA instead of Micro-
soft, Apple, and NVIDIA. The same thing can apply to ETFs. Although they might
refer to a collection of assets, many investors understand symbols such as VOO or SPY
as Vanguard S&P 500 ETF or SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust.
 Bonds are often more challenging to identify in data collected from a broker than
stocks. Bonds are different because they are emitted at regular intervals, and each
emission gets a different identifier. You can’t use the jargon to say you buy more VOO
or NVDA. You lend money to an entity under given conditions, which includes cou-
pon payment rates and maturity dates. If you decide to lend more money to a bond
issuer on a later stage, you subscribe to a new emission with different conditions. You
Figure 6.5 In the ETF Worksheet, we don’t have a column for the projected gains as it’s difficult to forecast price 
development accurately over multiple assets. 

138 CHAPTER  6Building an asset monitor
can still identify each bond through a unique identifier, such as an International Secu-
rities Identification Number (ISIN) such as US9128CLA70 on financial platforms.
 So, instead of enriching data with yfinance, we can go a different route with bonds.
The following code example shows how to migrate yield information that we store in
the SQLite table offline_asset  into the calculations. The yields of bonds are stored
in the database, and we merge them into the DataFrame:
bond_rates = all_offline_assets[
    all_offline_assets[COL_ASSET_TYPE].isin(['BOND'])
][["yield"]]
bond_df_merged_rates = all_bonds_held.merge(bond_rates, on=COL_TICKER)
bond_df_merged_rates[COL_TOT_YIELD] = (
    bond_df_merged_rates[COL_TOT_VALUE] 
* bond_df_merged_rates[COL_YIELD] 
/ 100)
We could examine bond capital appreciation and, of course, extend this code to add
risk ratings. However, these values rarely change if you invest cautiously in bonds, so
we keep it simple. Figure 6.6 shows a bond worksheet with reference data.
6.5.4 Cryptocurrencies
In this example, we showcase how to retrieve information about assets from a crypto
exchange. Listing 6.10 illustrates the functionality, using Binance as a reference exam-
ple. We use the python_binance  API. To gather the data, we employ the get_simple_
earn_locked_product_position  and get_simple_earn_flexible_product_position
functions. These methods return our holdings on Binance, depending on their status.
We can lock them temporarily, which means we get higher staking returns, or have
them available to sell at any time, reducing staking returns. The method returns all of
our positions in the same data structure.
from binance.client import Client
binance_client = Client(os.getenv("exchange.binance.api"),
                        os.getenv("exchange.binance.secret"))Listing 6.10 Loading data from Binance
Figure 6.6 In the bond 
worksheet, the value 
represents the par value (the 
value we’ll get returned at 
maturation), and we also get 
the annual yield, besides the 
number of bonds we hold.

139 6.5 Processing assets
locked_assets = pd.DataFrame(                       
    [
        (pos["asset"], pos["amount"], pos["apy"]) 
        for pos in binance_client
        .get_simple_earn_locked_product_position()['rows']
], 
columns=[COL_TICKER, COL_AMOUNT, COL_YIELD])        
flexible_assets = pd.DataFrame(                          
    [(pos["asset"], pos["totalAmount"], 
      pos["latestAnnualPercentageRate"]) 
      for pos in binance_client
     .get_simple_earn_flexible_product_position()['rows']],
      columns=[COL_TICKER, COL_AMOUNT, COL_YIELD])       
assets = pd.concat([locked_assets,
                    flexible_assets])             
assets = assets.astype({COL_AMOUNT: 'float', 
                        COL_YIELD: 'float', 
                        COL_TICKER: 'string'})    
assets.set_index(COL_TICKER, inplace=True)        
As we’ve now collected the positions from Binance, we can also load our offline assets.
In this example, we assume we have our cryptocurrency, which is associated with the
keys we’ve stored on a hardware ledger. The amount and current staking rate are
stored in the offline_asset  table:
ledger_cryptos = all_offline_assets[
    all_offline_assets[COL_ASSET_TYPE].isin(["CRYPTO"])]
A s  w e  n o w  h a v e  a l l  o u r  c r y p t o c u r r e n c y  i n  a  D a t a F r a m e ,  w e  o n l y  n e e d  t o  a d d  t h e
prices. We load the current prices from CoinMarketCap. The code in listing 6.11
shows how to do that. We first create a session object and then request the data based
on the cryptocurrencies provided in a list and US dollars as the target currency. Lastly,
we extract the price as a value to merge this into the DataFrame with our holdings. Be
aware that you again need to register and get a secret to access CoinMarketCap.
session = Session()
session.headers.update({
    'Accepts': 'application/json',
    'X-CMC_PRO_API_KEY': os.getenv("broker.coinmarketcap.com")
})
res = session.get(
    'https://pro-api.coinmarketcap.com/v2/'
    'cryptocurrency/quotes/latest', 
    params={
         'symbol': ','.join(df.index.unique()), 
         'convert': 'USD'
    }
)      Listing 6.11 Loading price data from CoinMarketCapLoads cryptos in a 
simple earn locked 
position
Loads cryptos in a 
simple earn flexible 
position
Merges and unifies 
the structure
Loads data from 
CoinMarketCap

140 CHAPTER  6Building an asset monitor
if res.status_code != 200:
    print(f"API Error: {res.status_code} - {res.text}")
    return df
data = res.json().get("data", {})                
prices = {
    coin: data[coin][0]['quote']['USD']['price']
    for coin in data 
    if 'USD' in data[coin][0]['quote']
}                                                
df[COL_PRICE] = df.index.map(prices)
There’s one small detail to watch out for when exporting data. Google Finance
doesn’t provide data on many cryptocurrencies on its platform. So, instead of Google
Finance, we need to load data from a different provider. The code for assembling is
outlined here: 
update_cols.append(
    f'=IFERROR(REGEXREPLACE('
    f'IMPORTDATA("https://cryptoprices.cc/{ticker}");'
    f'"[.]";","'
    f')*{col_amount_character}{counter+2};'
    f'{col_tot_val_character}{counter+2})'
)
We load the data from the Crypto Prices site ( https:/ /cryptoprices.cc ). Because some
errors may be returned, depending on the access frequency, we fill the cell with the
value from the last export if we can’t obtain a proper value. Figure 6.7 shows an export
of crypto assets into the crypto spreadsheet of the worksheet.Extracts data 
from returns
Figure 6.7 The crypto worksheet returns the total value, the staking yield, the amount we own, and 
the live data.

141 Summary
6.6 Outlook
The Jupyter Notebook we developed throughout the chapter can be a template for
creating your personal asset monitor. Within this framework, we establish a dedicated
worksheet for each asset type, emphasizing a key concept. Although all assets have the
potential for capital appreciation and passive income, their specific characteristics
and behaviors vary significantly.
 No book can provide a foolproof, step-by-step guide to getting rich overnight. If
someone claims otherwise, it’s likely a scam. Think about it—if someone had a sure-
fire way to create wealth from nothing, the odds of them sharing it with you are slim;
they’d probably be sailing the world on a yacht or living among the ultra-rich.
 A book like this can equip you with the tools to focus on the details necessary to
make something solid. This asset monitor is a starting point. What aspects do you want
to analyze in more detail? Perhaps you’re focused on a single asset class but want more
profound insights. Why not create custom worksheets tailored to your interests—
whether it’s risk analysis, environmental, social, and governance (ESG) factors, or val-
uation metrics? You decide what matters most.
 Being able to track assets is a precondition for monitoring stock performance. If
we can explore performance, we also have a good foundation for tracking risks. Let’s
move on to chapter 7 for more details on that.
Summary
An asset monitor helps you collect information about all of your assets in one
place.
Using Python, we can access brokers such as Alpaca or Interactive Brokers,
extract data, and merge it into a single dataset.
We can enrich this dataset with data from financial platforms such as Yahoo
Finance, giving us all the details we need about our holdings.
You can use Google Sheets as an asset monitor and write into worksheets using
Python and the gspread library.
Unifying the view on your assets helps convert all shares into the same currency
if you hold assets in different currencies.
Sometimes, tickers collected from brokers differ from those used by financial
platforms. We can solve this using lookup tables.
Occasionally, we can’t retrieve data for certain assets. However, we can duplicate
the information about these assets in a database and still process the data for
financial analysis.
Stocks and ETFs share a similar interface. We can collect them through the
same commands, but not all methods available for one type of asset are avail-
able for the other.

142 CHAPTER  6Building an asset monitor
Although they differ in detail, we can sum up dividend payments from stocks,
coupon rates from bonds, and staking rewards from crypto as “yield” to have a
common terminology for passive income. 
When collecting data from Binance, we can load actual price data from Coin-
MarketCap.
Traditional finance platforms have limited support for cryptocurrency, but we
can use a different provider, such as Crypto Prices ( https:/ /cryptoprices.cc ) and
CoinMarketCap, to get live data in cells.

143Risk management
Exploring assets that can multiply their original value many times is thrilling. How-
ever, if you stake your life savings on extraordinary profits, you might find yourself
sleepless at night, questioning whether you abandoned your common sense the
moment you made that investment.
 In our minds, we can picture the stereotype of a gambler who seeks the thrill.
However, we can also envision a stereotype of a risk-averse investor: a dry person
who lectures us on efficient market theory and continually advocates for putting all
of our money into diversified ETFs. They occasionally insist that investing in single
stocks with low-risk ratings is too risky. Encountering them when you dream about
living in a big mansion with the potential returns can feel like a slap in the face. No
matter how enthusiastic we are, they always have an explanation for why thingsThis chapter covers
Classifying risks
Mitigating risks 
Hedging strategies
Optimizing your portfolio using the Markowitz 
model
Assessing nonfinancial risks

144 CHAPTER  7Risk management
won’t unfold as we hope. Whether it’s human bias, statistics about fund managers and
their historical returns, or something else, the recommendation remains the same:
you can’t beat the market, so invest in it by buying shares in index funds.
 The debates about risks versus returns are endless. One side argues that investors
like Warren Buffett, Jim Simons, and Peter Lynch have consistently outperformed the
market, suggesting that anyone can do the same. Energy goes where attention flows; if
you’re patient and self-reflective, you’ll become wealthy if you focus on the right top-
ics. The other side keeps reasoning about the academic insights of giants such as
Eugene Fama or Burton Malkiel, including the efficient market theory and random
walks. It often seems that each side has its statistics: one shows that actively managed
hedge funds by a strong fund manager beat passive funds, and the other claims that
studies show that blindfolded monkeys throwing darts can pick a portfolio that beats
those of seasoned investors, as the market is unpredictable.
 This chapter can be seen as an antithesis to chapter 4, in which we focused on what
we could gain if we analyzed the growth potential of stocks. Here, we explore what we
can lose if things go wrong, arriving at the synthesis: we need to study both risk and
returns and decide how much risk we can accept in a nondeterministic environment.
 In this chapter, we first classify risks. After learning about risks, we examine ways to
measure them and, finally, how to mitigate them.
7.1 Ukemi
In martial arts, the first lesson isn’t how to jump or kick—it’s how to fall safely. The Japa-
nese call this ukemi . The same principle applies to systems: safeguard first, then scale.
 Developers already understand this concept through test-driven development
(TDD), where unit tests are written before the code. Experienced developers have
likely encountered projects lacking clean code and TDD practices—they often turn
into black boxes where small changes lead to unpredictable results. Returning to
chaos is unthinkable once you’ve worked in a clean, structured environment. While
clean development may seem slower due to peer reviews and careful implementation,
it reduces costly bug fixes.
 Risk management in investing follows a similar logic. By implementing best prac-
tices early, you prevent problems before they arise, protecting both your portfolio and
peace of mind.
7.1.1 Stop-loss
A crucial ukemi  in investing is the stop-loss order. Think of it as a safety net: a pre-
defined price at which your broker automatically sells a position to limit losses. If
there’s one thing you can do to reduce stress, it’s setting a stop-loss for every position.
Without it, investing is like performing acrobatics without a net—why risk unnecessary
losses when they can be prevented?
 Stop-losses can also be adjusted as share prices rise. Suppose you buy a stock at $8,
which surges to $25. Believing in further growth, you initially set a stop-loss at $7.

145 7.1 Ukemi
Instead of selling at $25, you raise the stop-loss to $22 after the surge. This resolves a
common dilemma: if the stock climbs higher, you stay in the game, but if it falls, you
still lock in gains at $22. Without a stop-loss, you might regret not securing your prof-
its if the stock drops back to $8. Figure 7.1 illustrates a stop-loss order.
In chapter 11, we’ll cover how to set stop-loss orders effectively through an API. How-
ever, you can put one through your broker if you hold assets. Select Good Till Can-
celed for your order to keep your safety net in place.
Stop-loss in practice
The example in figure 7.1 shows that if I set a stop loss at $22 and the share price
falls below $22, the shares will be sold. Would it not be wise to place a stop loss on
all positions? Let’s consider three aspects:
Taxes —If you sell a stock at $22 that you bought at $8, you’ve made a profit.
Depending on local tax regulations, this profit may fall under capital gains tax.
Sometimes, you don’t want to pay taxes immediately, especially if you could
write off gains in positions to cover losses in others at a different time.
Transaction costs —If you sell, you must pay a small fee for the transaction. If
you want to buy again immediately, remember the spread between the ask
and bid price: If you sell all of your shares and immediately repurchase the
same number, you would likely lose money. Sometimes, you want to hold
stocks long-term, and rebuying them at a similar price might be costly.
Figure 7.1 In this reference for a stop-loss order, the stop loss is adjusted to 
$22 on day 6 after the share price rises. When the stock goes below $22, the 
stop loss will be triggered, and the investor will sell at a market price on day 9.

146 CHAPTER  7Risk management
7.1.2 Risk classification
As a developer, you thrive on creative momentum when implementing new features.
The excitement of exploring ideas can feel intoxicating, and overthinking potential
failures may slow progress.
 The software needs to be deployed at some point, and the threat of real users
complaining about bugs might keep developers and their managers awake at night.
Suddenly, Murphy’s Law takes over—what can go wrong will go wrong, and your per-
spective shifts. Site reliability engineers (SREs) embody this mindset, ensuring flawless
execution. While early-stage development is driven by creativity, SREs must think
destructively, anticipating failure at every step. A good SRE always classifies and priori-
tizes risks.
 Engineers recognize that a complete system outage is worse than a partial slow
response time. Likewise, owning a stock experiencing daily share price fluctuations is
preferable to holding assets in a company that goes bankrupt. Of course, the first sce-
nario might lead to the second and can be a warning sign, and, at the same time, fluc-
tuations are part of the market. To manage risk effectively, we must be able to measure
risks and classify them by their possible effect.
To understand systemic risk, we can create a mental model of the market and identify
events that could destabilize the entire system. Systemic risk  refers to disruptions that
threaten the financial system. A classic example is the 2008 financial crisis, where the
collapse of major institutions nearly triggered an economic meltdown.(continued)
Fluctuations —Assume the share price is below $22. You sell, but right after,
the price goes up again, far above $22. You can rebuy the shares at a higher
price, but you would have made a loss. What if you could buy the right to sell
at a fixed price and the right to buy at a certain price? This would be the next
complexity to manage risks after stop loss: welcome to the world of options. 
Bikeshedding
“Bikeshedding,” or Parkinson’s Law of Triviality, describes the tendency to focus
excessively on minor, easy-to-understand details while overlooking more complex and
critical issues. The term originates from an example where a committee debates the
color of a bike shed for hours but barely discusses a nuclear power plant proposal. 
Bikeshedding is a common problem in all fields, including investing. You might fixate
on a temporary 5% dip in one stock while ignoring a far more serious risk—another
company in your portfolio teetering on the edge of default. Staying focused on what
truly matters is key to sound decision-making.

147 7.1 Ukemi
 While doomsday scenarios such as nuclear war technically qualify as systemic risks,
they are beyond the scope of financial planning. Building a bunker is more practical
than safeguarding your portfolio if you’re worried about such events.
 Excluding extreme catastrophes, we can still categorize financial risks systemati-
cally, helping investors prepare for market-wide threats and mitigate potential dam-
age. Let’s see what can go wrong to understand how we can prepare ourselves:
Market risk —Stock prices are significantly affected by overall market trends.
Economic downturns, geopolitical events, or shifts in market sentiment can
lead to widespread declines, even when individual companies perform well.
Sector risk —Investing in stocks concentrated in a specific sector (e.g., technol-
ogy, energy) exposes investors to risks that may affect that entire sector, such as
regulatory changes, demand shifts, or technological disruption.
Asset-specific risk —Individual stocks carry the risk of poor performance due to
company-specific issues such as mismanagement, declining sales, product fail-
ures, or scandals. This is also known as unsystematic risk .
The power of compounding vs. high-risk investing
Imagine two investors: Ivan is an aggressive investor willing to take significant risks,
while Alicia takes calculated risks, only as much as necessary.
Both start with $100,000 and invest for 10 years.
Ivan’s approach —He wins big sometimes and loses big at other times, ulti-
mately breaking even at $100,000 by year 10. However, at that point, he
makes an exceptional investment that doubles his money overnight, bringing
his total to $200,000.
Alicia’s approach —She achieves a steady 10% return per year. If she with-
draws her profits each year, she also ends up with $200,000, the same as
Ivan.
But if she reinvests her gains, the formula for compound interest applies:
P(1 + i)n
where
P = 100,000 (initial capital)
i = 0.10 (10% return)
n = 10 (years)
These numbers result in the following:
100,000(1.1)10 = 259,374
By reinvesting her returns, Alicia ended up with $259,374, outperforming
Ivan’s final amount. In the long run, consistent compounding often beats spo-
radic windfalls.

148 CHAPTER  7Risk management
Every investor hears this phrase at some point in their career: “Past performance is no
guarantee of future results.” Relying too heavily on history repeating itself can lead to
costly mistakes. Yet completely ignoring historical patterns is just as dangerous. Because
we can classify risk, we must consider how to measure it based on past evidence.
7.1.3 Risk measurement
The economy is a complex, interconnected system that moves in cycles—bubbles,
crashes, and recoveries. While no event unfolds identically, recurring patterns emerge.
The challenge is distinguishing between genuine trends and coincidences. This per-
spective helps macroeconomists predict the ripple effects of disruptions. Take the war
in Ukraine: concerns over the Ukrainian grain harvest signaled potential famine risks,
leading to fears of unrest in emerging markets that are rich in raw materials. Such
unrest could disrupt mining, affecting companies reliant on gold, cobalt, and nickel.
Similarly, sanctions on Russian gas drove up European energy prices, fueling inflation.
 Figure 7.2 illustrates risk factors for a hypothetical US-based AI company. What if
an emerging AI platform such as DeepSeek disrupts the market in 2025? Or what if
a societal countermovement against AI gains traction, which can be seen as a market
risk, making it harder to sell AI services? AI developers in some countries experi-
ence more challenging regulatory environments than their peers from different
regions. Those who worked in environments with more strict regulations can attest
that new regulatory frameworks might become a problem for companies unpre-
pared for this change.
AI start-upMismanagement
(internal risk)
High energy prices Regulatory riskPolitical risk
(external)DisruptorDemand lost Market risk
(external)Lack of funding
Lack of engineersOrganizational
risk (internal +
external)
Figure 7.2 A high-level risk model containing some of the challenges an AI startup faces

149 7.1 Ukemi
These are just a few potential risks, reinforcing the “Understand the businesses you
invest in” principle. Before investing, ask yourself these questions:
Do you know what could go wrong in a company?
Do you understand its most significant risks and threats?
If not, reconsider your investment. Otherwise, you would have to learn how catalysts,
which you’re unaware of, play a role in driving share prices up and down.
 Figure 7.3 presents a risk matrix to classify threats. Take the risk of an anti-AI move-
ment: unlikely, but potentially catastrophic if it gains momentum and demands AI
bans. Another risk—rising energy prices—could slow AI expansion if power plants
can’t scale fast enough to control costs.
To use risk matrices efficiently, you can review your positions and assess risks to define
actions. Let’s go through an example. Let’s assume you hold Coca-Cola, Apple, and
Pfizer stock. You can research possible risk scenarios, such as the following: “What if
there is another pandemic?” or “What if there are new trade wars?” Let’s assume fur-
ther that we conclude through a small assessment of the current political situation
that, based on a personal evaluation, we consider an escalation of a trade war between
the United States and China as possible. Then, we can go through all positions in the
portfolio. Quick research and personal assessments indicate that potential harm from
Coca-Cola and Pfizer is marginal. Still, we may conclude that an escalation of a trade
war would be critical for Apple, leading to a high-risk rating based on the matrix.
 Investor Ray Dalio recommends acting on principles when investing. Some inves-
tors may decide to get active in times of high risk. Others might be more relaxed and
act only when the risk rating reaches “very high.” One key principle of managing risksLikelihoodHarm severity
Minor Marginal Critical Catastrophic
Certain
Likely
Possible
Unlikely
Rare
EliminatedHigh
Medium
Low
Low
LowHigh
High High
High
High
LowMedium
Medium Medium
Medium MediumVery high Very high
Very high
Very high
Eliminated
Figure 7.3 How to map risk in a matrix based on severity and likelihood. We 
commonly create strategies to meet risks with higher harm severity first to 
mitigate the effect once the consequences become unavoidable.

150 CHAPTER  7Risk management
is to define what to do if catastrophes happen. Defining concrete actions when events
occur and following these actions no matter what ensures efficiency. 
 So, let’s assume you decide your principle is to sell all shares when they reach the
highest risk level, and let’s imagine an event that makes a trade war certain. Following
your principle, you would immediately sell all the shares of high-risk companies. Yes,
this may sound bureaucratic, but you can never forget a quote attributed to Mike
Tyson: “Everybody has a plan until they get punched in the face.” When filled with
emotions, you might still do the right things, if you have clear guidance on what to do.
Without guidance, and when panic takes over, it can become more difficult to make
rational and correct decisions.
 Assessing risks also means understanding beta, a measure of an asset’s sensitivity to
market fluctuations:
Beta = 1 —Moves with the market
Beta > 1 —More volatile than the market
Beta < 1 —More stable than the market
Think of beta like a system’s performance under load. High-beta assets spike under
stress, while low-beta assets remain stable.
 Beta often aligns with common sense. In a bear market, unemployment rises, con-
sumers prioritize essentials (supermarkets benefit), and discretionary spending
declines (car dealers suffer). However, company-specific risks can be independent of
market trends—mismanagement alone can drive a company into distress. In the next
section, we’ll explore how to measure risk effectively.
7.2 Generating risk profiles for individual stocks
Historical data about a company helps us assess performance by examining funda-
mental factors (e.g., debt trends). In addition, we can study chart movements, often
referred to as technical analysis , to explore the potential risks of a decline in share
prices. The approach varies based on a company’s stage and size.
 As a programmer, you’ve likely encountered applications with inconsistent
response times—high variability erodes user trust. The same principle applies to stock
prices. If an asset’s price has fluctuated significantly in the past, it signals risk. And
sometimes, what goes down doesn’t always come back up. Let’s take a deeper look at
past price movements.
7.2.1 Value at risk (VaR)
Value at risk (VaR)  is a tool for measuring the potential loss of an investment or portfo-
lio over a specified period, under normal market conditions, at a given confidence
level. It answers the question, “What’s the worst loss I could face, and how likely is it?”
 As a programmer, you can think of VaR as setting a threshold for system downtime:
“What’s the maximum downtime we might experience within a week, 95% of the

151 7.2 Generating risk profiles for individual stocks
time?” Now, replace “downtime” with “loss,” and that’s essentially what VaR is. Let’s
break it down:
You monitor a portfolio (a collection of assets).
You need a time frame (e.g., days, months) and a confidence level.
These can be used to determine risk, such as the following: “We’re 95% confi-
dent that the portfolio won’t lose more than $30,000 in one day.”
Here’s a practical example: your portfolio is worth $1,000,000. Analysts estimate a
one-day VaR at 95% confidence of $30,000. This means there’s only a 5% chance your
portfolio will lose more than $30,000 on any given day. So, 95% of the time, your loss
will be $30,000 or less.
 To calculate VaR, we simulate the potential future risks based on historical data.
There are two common approaches:
Variance-coeffect method —This approach assumes that returns follow a normal dis-
tribution. It’s similar to predicting load times using standard deviation.
Monte Carlo simulation —This method simulates numerous potential outcomes,
like stress-testing code under various edge cases.
Using these methods, we can estimate the potential risk to our portfolio, just like
you’d analyze system performance under different scenarios.
 A Monte Carlo simulation  is a computational technique for modeling the probability
of different outcomes in a process with inherent uncertainty. It relies on repeated ran-
dom sampling to obtain numerical results, making it useful for scenarios where tradi-
tional analytical methods are infeasible. In listing 7.1, we outline an example of a
Monte Carlo simulation using Apple share prices. We need parameters such as confi-
dence level. Then, we load the stock data to collect returns and calculate the means
and standard deviation. This is the basis for running a Monte Carlo simulation, mean-
ing we simulate future returns based on past returns. We plot and print the results.
import numpy as np
import yfinance as yf
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
ticker = "AAPL"              
confidence_level = 0.95      
num_simulations = 10000      
time_horizon = 1             
stock = yf.Ticker(ticker)                       
hist = stock.history(period="1y")               
returns = hist['Close'].pct_change().dropna()   
mu = returns.mean()       
sigma = returns.std()     Listing 7.1 Monte Carlo simulation for VaR on Apple
Sets up the 
parameters
Fetches historical stock 
data and calculates 
historical returns
Estimates the mean and 
standard deviation of returns

152 CHAPTER  7Risk management
last_price = hist['Close'].iloc[-1]                
sim_returns = np.random.normal(mu, 
                               sigma, 
                               num_simulations)    
sim_prices = last_price * (1 + sim_returns)        
threshold = np.percentile(sim_prices - last_price, 
                          (1 - confidence_level) * 100)   
plt.hist(simulated_prices - last_price, bins=50, 
         alpha=0.75, color="blue", edgecolor="black")    
plt.axvline(threshold, color="red", 
         linestyle="dashed", linewidth=2)                
plt.title(f"Monte Carlo Simulated "
          f"P&L Distribution for {ticker}")              
plt.xlabel("Profit/Loss")                                
plt.ylabel("Frequency")                                  
plt.show()                                               
print(f"{confidence_level * 100}% Monte Carlo "
      f"VaR for {ticker}: ${-var_threshold:.2f}")        
Figure 7.4 shows the result of a Monte Carlo simulation as a plot, outlining that this
stock is relatively stable. The results indicate that there is a 95% chance the loss won’t
exceed $5.50 per share.Monte Carlo 
simulation of 
stock price paths
Calculates VaR at 
given confidence 
level
Puts out 
the result
Figure 7.4 The result of a Monte Carlo simulation concludes that based on 
the historical data, only 5% of the time were the losses of Apple share prices 
higher than $5.50 a day.

153 7.2 Generating risk profiles for individual stocks
For this, we calculated an example based on Apple. We can run a Monte Carlo simu-
lation on all portfolio stocks and aggregate these results to the total VaR of the
whole portfolio.
 Please remember that Black Swan events are unpredictable events beyond what is
normally expected. Excluding these outliers, VaRs can be seen as worst-case scenarios
based on historical data under normal circumstances. Investors can calculate the VaRs
of all their holdings and match them with their risk appetite. In some cases, investors
may decide to decrease (or also increase) the risks.
7.2.2 Correlation
Correlation  measures how assets move relative to one another. Positively correlated
assets move in the same direction; negatively correlated ones move oppositely. It’s like
service dependencies—when one microservice fails, does it take down others? 
 In chapter 3, we already logged returns and simple returns. Using the code we
used in previous chapters, let’s load the data for three companies:
def collect_prices_returns(tickers: list):
    close_prices = pd.DataFrame()
    log_returns = pd.DataFrame()
    for ticker in tickers:
        close_prices[ticker] = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(
            start='2024-01-01', 
            end='2024-12-31', 
            interval="1d")['Close']
        log_returns[ticker] = np.log(close_prices[ticker] 
                                     / close_prices[ticker].shift(1))
    return close_prices, log_returns
tickers = ["MSFT", "AMZN", "GOOGL"]
close_prices, log_returns  = collect_prices_returns(tickers)
Now that we have the log returns and the closing prices in memory, we can run a fun-
damental statistical analysis. The following code shows how to run the mean, standard
deviation, and variance aggregations on the stock prices:
price_stats = (
    close_prices[tickers]
    .agg(['mean', 'std', 'var'])
    .T.reset_index()
    .rename(columns={'index': 'ticker'})
)
The closing prices of the stocks fluctuate, as shown in table 7.1, over the year.
 Let’s investigate standard deviation ( std) and variance ( var). Variance  measures
the average squared deviation from the mean. It tells you how much the values in a
dataset spread out from the mean. Variance is in squared units, making it less inter-
pretable for practical use.

154 CHAPTER  7Risk management
Standard deviation is simply the square root of variance. It measures the same disper-
sion but in the same units as the original data, making it more interpretable. Variance
(var) is helpful in theoretical statistics and when comparing relative dispersion across
datasets. standard deviation ( std) is used in most practical applications because it
retains the original unit of measurement.
TIP As some analysts may use variance, it’s still essential to understand how
variance can be used in financial analysis. Otherwise, you can focus on stan-
dard deviation in your analyses.
Previous chapters show that the overall share price is just one part of a company’s cap-
italization; for example, 418 (the mean of Microsoft) doesn’t mean we’re doing better
than 163 (the mean of Google). A company’s share price is just a number that doesn’t
relate to any other share price. If Microsoft decided to split the shares 1:10, the mean
would be 41.8, with 10 times more shares than before.
 The absolute price of a share in a given currency is not a reliable measure for com-
paring the performance of different stocks. For meaningful comparisons, we should use
percentage changes in value, with log returns offering an even better basis for analysis:
rets = (
    log_returns[tickers]
    .agg(['mean', 'std', 'var'])
    .T * [TRADING_DAYS, TRADING_DAYS**0.5, TRADING_DAYS]
)
rets = rets.reset_index().rename(columns={'index': 'ticker'})
rets
The results of this script, shown in table 7.2, help us compare the companies. Micro-
soft was more stable during the test period than Amazon and Alphabet. Keep in mind
that these patterns might be different in other years.Table 7.1 Mean, standard deviation, and variance on share prices of Microsoft, Amazon, and Alphabet
Company mean std var
Microsoft (MSFT) 418.73445 18.19813 331.17207
Amazon (AMZN) 184.49020 17.32285 300.08126
Alphabet (GOOGL) 163.31029 15.40605 237.34623
Table 7.2 Mean, standard deviation, and variance on log returns of Microsoft, Amazon, and Alphabet
Company mean std var
Microsoft 0.14443 0.20078 0.04031
Amazon 0.39247 0.28154 0.07926
Alphabet 0.33129 0.28045 0.07865

155 7.2 Generating risk profiles for individual stocks
Let’s put stocks in correlation: when calculating the covariance  between stocks, you
measure how their returns move relative to each other. Covariance helps you under-
stand the relationship between different assets in a portfolio. If we call the cov()
method on the DataFrame with the log returns and multiply it with the number of
trading days, we get the covariance matrix:
cov_matrix = log_returns.cov() * TRADING_DAYS
cov_matrix
Let’s look at the results. Covariance tells us if the variables move together, but not how
much. If the covariance value is larger than 0, the assets tend to move in the same
direction, and if the value is lower than 0, they tend to move in opposite directions.
The numbers in table 7.3 indicate that there might be some dependencies among the
price movements of these three stocks.
We need the correlation to understand how much these variables move with each
other. This tells us both the strength and the direction of the relationship. Correlation
standardizes covariance by dividing by the standard deviation, resulting in a bounded
value between –1 and 1. We get results such as the following:
+1: Perfect positive correlation (move exactly together)
0: No relationship
–1: Perfect negative correlation (move exactly opposite)
To calculate the correction, we need to run the corr()  method on the DataFrame
with the log returns. Note that as the correlation is independent of dimensions, we
don’t need to multiply by trading days as we had to with the covariance:
corr_matrix = log_returns.corr() 
corr_matrix
Like variance and standard deviation, we might prefer one method (correlation) over
the other (covariance). As covariance might be used in some analyses, it’s still helpful
to know that this method exists.
 Looking at the results in table 7.4, we get deeper insights. These three companies
correlate a lot, which is logical. They all focus on cloud computing and AI, and they
provide similar solutions to clients.Table 7.3 Covariance of Microsoft, Amazon, and Alphabet
Company MSFT AMZN GOOGL
Microsoft 0.04031 0.03887 0.03239
Amazon 0.03887 0.07926 0.04290
Alphabet 0.03239 0.04290 0.07865

156 CHAPTER  7Risk management
This leads to a hypothesis: if the market believes there is no more room to grow in the
cloud business or the AI hype is over, all three positions might lose heavily. Let’s look
at another example by comparing NVIDIA with Walmart:
close_price, log_returns = collect_prices_returns(["WMT", "NVDA"])
corr_matrix = log_returns.corr()
print(corr_matrix)
Looking at table 7.5, we observe an intuitively correct result. NVDA is a technology
stock. If things go well, investors will believe in AI growth and purchase stocks like
NVIDIA’s. However, they might want to move to more defensive stocks, such as
Walmart, if they start doubting AI.
 Conclusively, one possible strategy is to pick stocks with a negative correlation.
Based on historical data, if NVIDIA goes down, Walmart goes up. This might reduce
possible gains in a sunny-day scenario, but also mitigate losses in a rainy-day scenario.
This means we can use algorithms to assess risks. Before applying concrete hedging
techniques to mitigate risks, let’s explore risk on a more generic level.
7.3 The human factor
Many engineers have encountered this scenario: the company brings in a new, ultra-
strict chief security officer (CSO). Suddenly, after enjoying freedom in previous roles,
you now need approvals for everything. Simple tasks become bureaucratic nightmares,
requiring endless workarounds.
 Yet, despite the fortress-like security policies, you stumble upon something absurd—
an outsider with unrestricted access to server rooms for maintenance work or hidden
“super users” with god-mode permissions.
 Investing works the same way. Strict risk controls can give a false sense of security,
while hidden vulnerabilities can expose you to unexpected threats. Let’s explore this
further and how this connects with investment.Table 7.4 Correlation of Microsoft, Amazon, and Alphabet
Company MSFT AMZN GOOGL
Microsoft 1.00000 0.68765 0.57522
Amazon 0.68765 1.00000 0.54331
Alphabet 0.57522 0.54331 1.00000
Table 7.5 Correlation between Walmart and NVIDIA
Company WMT NVDA
Walmart 1.00000 -0.00532
NVIDIA -0.00532 1.00000

157 7.3 The human factor
7.3.1 Negligence
Ask any cybersecurity engineer about the most significant threat, and the answer is
likely human negligence . Technical security is deterministic—you can model interac-
tions, strengthen encryption, and enforce multifactor authentication. But you can’t
stop someone from writing their password on a sticky note beside an unlocked phone.
 The same applies to investing. Your most considerable risk isn’t just market volatil-
ity or scams—it’s your own psychology . Engineers who understand blockchain may avoid
crypto scams but still fall victim to greed, fear, and impulsive decisions. Technology
can help: you can set trading limits, restrict access, or execute orders at fixed inter-
vals—but when emotions take over, those safeguards can be overridden.
 No security manual can eliminate user mistakes, and no investing book can erase
emotional biases. However, awareness is the first step. Fear of Missing Out (FOMO)
causes investors to chase unsustainable gains, but recognizing this bias helps miti-
gate its effect.
 Engineers working in teams use methodologies such as Scrum  to improve processes
through retrospectives. Investing benefits from a similar approach—analyzing past
decisions with hard data and peer reviews. By tracking your portfolio (chapter 6), you
gain insights into what worked and what didn’t.
 If you know your psychology is a weak point, take action. Self-reflection —understanding
your deeper motivations—extends beyond trading into personal growth. Brokers offer
risk management tools, such as these:
Risk profiles —Restricts high-risk trades
Cool-off periods —Delays access to risky features
Sometimes, that extra waiting period is the difference between a reckless gamble and
a rational decision after a night’s rest. Like cybersecurity, investing isn’t just about
technical expertise—it’s about controlling human behavior, including your own.
7.3.2 Risk avoidance
Financial advisors and brokers often begin assessing your risk appetite during the
Know Your Customer (KYC) process. Despite what some die-hard advocates may
claim, there’s no single best investment strategy—only strategies that align with your
risk tolerance.
 The simplest way to mitigate risk is to choose safe investments. Index funds, for
example, are widely considered low-risk. While individual companies can fail, index
funds would only collapse if the entire economy did—at which point, our portfolio
performance would be the least of our concerns.
 Many investors view index funds as the holy grail of investing. After all, if the odds
of beating the market are low, why take unnecessary risks trying? Many people also
worry about the “perfect” time to invest. After making a purchase, they often panic if
the market dips, leading to short-term mistakes. To mitigate this, you can use dollar-cost
averaging (DCA) —investing a fixed amount at regular intervals, regardless of market

158 CHAPTER  7Risk management
conditions. While not perfect timing, DCA reduces the risk of buying at a peak and
smooths out market volatility over time.
 A balanced approach works well if you still want to invest actively. You can allocate
a fixed amount to index funds and a smaller portion to individual investments. And if
you beat the performance of index funds multiple years in a row, you can still adjust
the ratio of actively and passively managed investments as much as you like.
 The most obvious risk-reduction strategy is investing in businesses you understand.
Familiarity allows you to assess risks more accurately and identify opportunities others
might overlook. This aligns with value investing, which focuses on buying underval-
ued companies based on fundamental analysis.
 One core principle of value investing is the margin of safety —buying assets priced
below their intrinsic value to provide a cushion against potential losses. To use an
engineering analogy, imagine a client requests an application that must handle 100
peak-load requests. If you build it to handle exactly 100, there’s no margin for unex-
pected surges. The same applies to investing—without a margin of safety, even a slight
miscalculation can lead to failure.
Time horizon and risk
Investment strategies differ. Long-term investors often buy securities and hold them
for long periods. Some investors even like the idea of keeping value stocks forever.
Short-term trading is usually seen as a strategy closer to gambling. Traders look for
chart patterns and buy and sell shares often during the day when they believe they
have identified short-term trends. High-frequency trading (HFT) is another strategy
focused on buying and selling within milliseconds and seconds, for which traders
would need the infrastructure to be faster than other high-frequency traders. The idea
is to exploit very short-term price differences for arbitrage.
Trading and long-term investing require different approaches to risk. If you believe
your investments will grow by 10% annually over the next decade, a single bad trading
day is unlikely to concern you. However, in HFT, the risk is significantly higher. Imag-
ine an investor buys shares of ACME at $100, expecting to sell at $120. If the price
drops to $80 instead, they face immediate losses. When using leverage, the longer
they hold the position, the more they pay in interest, adding to their risk.
Short selling carries even more significant risks. As explained earlier in this book,
shorting means borrowing stocks to sell them, hoping to repurchase them later at a
lower price. Suppose an investor short sells 10 shares of ACME at $100, expecting
the price to drop. If the stock instead rises to $120, they must repurchase at a loss.
Unlike leveraged trading, short sellers also incur borrowing fees and dividend pay-
ments, making waiting out an unfavorable market move costly.
Contrast this with long-term investing. Suppose you invest in ACME because you
believe in steady demand for its products. You hold the stock for years, confident in
its future. But what if the company loses a key business deal or a highly anticipated
product becomes a flop? The warning signs may not be immediate—some investors
may quietly sell, while others remain unaware. Then, during ACME’s next earnings

159 7.3 The human factor
The risk-return tradeoff is like scaling a system—you can choose a safe, low-performance
setup or an aggressive, high-performance architecture with potential failure risks. If
your portfolio feels too risky, you can shift future investments toward safer assets. But the
key is always risk awareness. Some strategies carry exceptionally high risks:
Leverage —Borrowing money to invest. While it amplifies gains, excessive lever-
age can lead to disastrous losses.
Short selling —Betting against a stock. Losses are theoretically unlimited if the
price rises instead.
Derivatives —Complex financial instruments that can magnify both gains and risks.
Understanding risk appetite versus risk capacity is crucial. Risk appetite is your willingness
to take risks, while risk capacity  is your ability to withstand losses. Think of it like coding for
edge cases—you might be comfortable experimenting in a development environment
(appetite), but you wouldn’t push risky, untested changes to production (capacity).
7.3.3 Resilience
Imagine you buy two stocks at the same price. After a year, Company A dropped to
20% of its initial value, while Company B rose to 150%. You decide to sell one.
Which one? Most investors instinctively sell Company B, locking in gains while hop-
ing Company A recovers. But what if Company B keeps rising and Company A con-
tinues its decline?
 Athletes, especially tennis players, often lose momentum after a mistake. The best
ones recover quickly. Successful investors do the same—they accept losses, adapt, and
move forward. Every investor loses money at some point. The key is handling it wisely.
 Loss aversion—the tendency to avoid realizing losses—traps many investors. You
may hesitate to sell a losing stock, thinking it might rebound or that you’ll only lose if
you sell. However, ignoring loss aversion can lead to even bigger losses. Instead, step
back and remove emotions from the equation.call, a disappointing report triggers a sudden 30% crash. You research the stock,
read analyst reports, and realize ACME may never recover to your purchase price.
But then again, in many long positions, drops after earnings calls are temporary.
Investors may have feared that a company’s winning streak had reached its end, only
to be corrected by the market. Netflix and Meta experienced downtime in 2022 but
have since recovered. Others, such as Kodak or Peloton, have not. Risks for long-
term investors are different than those for traders. They can sit out temporary down
periods, but if they overlook that the product they had bet on years ago has become
obsolete with time, they can lose a lot of money too. Some investors might even see
the decline of their assets, but avoid selling due to loss aversion.
Understanding these different risk dynamics is crucial when selecting an investment
strategy. Whether trading actively or investing for the long term, managing downside
risk is essential to avoiding costly mistakes.

160 CHAPTER  7Risk management
 Imagine evaluating your portfolio from scratch. If you didn’t own Company A,
would you buy it today? Is it truly undervalued, or is it in a downward spiral with no
recovery? If the latter, sell it and reallocate the funds elsewhere.
 Conversely, if new information suggests Company A is a great buy, you might invest
more. But be brutally honest—don’t let sunk costs cloud your judgment.
 This book teaches you how to analyze markets with algorithms, not what to invest
in. If you struggle with tough decisions, recognize that your emotions and biases can
distort judgment.
 A trusted peer review, such as Warren Buffett’s with Charlie Munger, can help. But
choose your advisors wisely:
The loudmouth at the bar bragging about stock market wins? Not reliable.
A licensed financial advisor, vetted by a reputable institution? Possibly worth it.
Ultimately, the smartest investors cut losses, reassess facts, and stay disciplined—even
when it’s uncomfortable. The ability to face discomfort with a rational mind and be
ready to follow thought-through principles may be one of the most significant success-
ful factors in investing.
7.4 Hedging
Most of us have encountered Murphy’s law: What can go wrong, will go wrong.  Develop-
ers embrace this mindset, building metrics to assess code quality and unit tests to
catch potential failures. This habit of assuming the worst and preparing for it is invalu-
able in investing.
 Hedging is a risk management strategy that reduces or offsets potential losses, like
insurance. You sacrifice some potential gains to protect against severe downturns by
taking an opposing position in a related asset. While it won’t eliminate risk entirely, it
helps you sleep at night, knowing you’re shielded from extreme scenarios. Next, let’s
explore some practical ways to mitigate risk.
7.4.1 Derivatives
Derivatives are arrangements whose value derives from an underlying asset, such as a
commodity, currency, or security. They can be categorized this way:
Options —Buying a put option on your stock protects against price drops.
Futures —A farmer selling wheat futures locks in a price, avoiding losses if prices
fall.
Swaps —Interest rate swaps help companies hedge against rate fluctuations.
Let’s illustrate these concepts with examples:
Options example —Pedro owns ACME stock, purchased at $100 per share. He
knows the stock could move in either direction with an earnings call approach-
ing. To hedge his risk after the earnings call, he buys a put option to sell ACME

161 7.4 Hedging
at $95. If the stock stays above $95, it’s like paying an insurance premium with-
out needing to file a claim. But if ACME drops below $95, he can sell at that
price, minimizing losses.
Futures example —Farmer Yumi expects a plentiful harvest this year. However,
she also knows grain prices will likely drop if all farmers have high yields. To
protect against this risk, she buys futures, locking in a pre-agreed selling
price. If market prices fall due to oversupply, she can still sell at the higher,
predetermined price.
Swap example —A swap can be a complex agreement between companies or
countries to exchange assets with cash flow for some time. Imagine two com-
panies—one based in the United States and another in Europe. The US com-
pany needs euros to expand its business in Europe, while the European
company needs US dollars to enter the American market. Instead of each
company borrowing in a foreign currency and facing exchange rate risks, they
enter a swap agreement:
– The US company borrows dollars at a favorable interest rate and exchanges
them for euros with the European company.
– The European company borrows euros at a favorable rate and gives them to
the US company in exchange for dollars.
– Over time, both companies pay each other back in their local currencies,
reducing transaction costs and currency risks.
This structured agreement ensures both parties benefit by securing better loan terms
and minimizing exchange rate fluctuations.
Advanced derivatives trading: All about options 
Derivatives are far more complex and can’t be reduced to insurance. Option traders
use advanced trading strategies for income generation. Experienced traders can
choose from a compendium of option strategies. Note that there are many strategies
on the market. Although we can’t cover them all, let’s look at a couple of them:
Covered call —Let’s say you own 100 shares of a stock at a share price of
$100. You believe this stock will continue to pay reliable dividends, but will
hardly ever be over $110. So, you sell a call option at $110. You gain money
for the premium you just sold. If the stock stays below the strike price, you
make some extra money and don’t have to sell the stock. If the stock is on a
rally and increases to $120, you would have to sell it for $110, which leads
to a loss, as the difference is higher than the premium you earned.
Every option has an expiration date. If the expiration date has passed, the
option expires. There are also different types of options. European-style
options can be exercised only at expiration, and American-style options can
be exercised at any time before expiration.

162 CHAPTER  7Risk management
(continued)
Cash-secured put —Let’s say there is a stock with very volatile share prices.
You believe that the stock will gain a lot of value in the long run, but you don’t
want to buy it at a high price. You can sell a put option at a lower strike price.
If the share price drops and the buyer of your option exercises it, you buy this
stock at a lower cost. If your strategy works out, you’ll have gained twice.
You’ve earned money by selling a premium, and you’ve bought a stock with a
bright future that gains in the long run.
If you miscalculate and, let’s say, that specific company runs into a crisis
causing the share price to plummet, you might lose a lot of money. Imagine
investing in Enron before its collapse, only to have to buy shares from other
stockholders at a high price as the company’s value approaches zero.
Iron condor —This is a more advanced option strategy that is commonly used
to profit from low volatility in the market.
To recap, selling an option means you receive a premium in exchange for
taking on the obligation to buy or sell an asset at a specified strike price if
the buyer chooses to exercise. Conversely, when you purchase an option, you
acquire the right to buy or sell the asset under specific terms.
An option is said to be out of the money (OTM) when it has no intrinsic
value—for example, a call option whose strike price is above the current mar-
ket price, or a put option whose strike price is below it. If the asset price
never crosses the strike, the option expires as worthless. If it does cross, the
option becomes in the money (ITM).
In an iron condor strategy, you sell an OTM call and an OTM put, expecting
the underlying asset’s price to remain within a defined range. If the price
stays between the strike prices at expiration, both options expire worthless,
and you keep the entire premium collected. This is the ideal scenario, and it
reflects a bet on price stability.
However, the risk grows if the asset moves sharply up or down. To hedge
against significant losses, you also purchase an OTM call and an OTM put.
These long options cap your maximum loss, converting the strategy into a
credit spread on both sides.
Let’s walk through an example: imagine ACME stock is trading at $100. You con-
struct a European-style iron condor with six months until expiration:
Sell a call option with a strike price of $120.
Sell a put option with a strike price of $80.
Buy a call option with a strike price of $130.
Buy a put option with a strike price of $70.
In this setup, you collect premiums from the short call and put, and you pay smaller
premiums for the protective long options. The net result is a net credit, your maximum
potential profit, if ACME stays between $80 and $120.
Suppose an unexpected lawsuit from a disgruntled customer, Wile E. Coyote, sends
ACME’s stock tumbling. At expiration, the price is $20. The buyer of the $80 put

163 7.4 Hedging
7.4.2 Diversification
Ongoing discussions debate whether randomly picking stocks—akin to throwing
darts—can yield better results than actively managed funds, a question raised by
Burton Malkiel in A Random Walk Down Wall Street . While opinions vary, nearly
everyone agrees that putting all your eggs in one basket is risky. Significant risks
remain even if you invest in a company with the highest market capitalization, such
as one of the Magnificent Seven  (Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Meta, Microsoft, NVIDIA,
and Tesla). The company might not face bankruptcy in your lifetime, but stock
prices reflect market sentiment. You could buy at a peak, only to see years of stagna-
tion or decline.
 A common risk-management strategy is diversification—avoiding a single point of
failure. Programmers can relate: relying on a single server invites disaster if it crashes.
But does spreading investments across all Magnificent Seven stocks provide proper
diversification? As we’ve learned, fluctuations in stock prices are often correlated.
These companies share the same sector, so events affecting one could affect them all.
While your eggs may be in seven baskets, they’re still in the same AI truck heading
down the road of capital appreciation—if that truck veers off course, all of your eggs
are at risk.
 Proper diversification means reducing exposure to a single market. This could
involve holding stocks across different sectors or investing in a mix of assets such as
bonds and real estate.
7.4.3 Pair trading
Pair trading  is a market-neutral strategy where an investor goes long on one asset and
short on another, typically within the same industry or among correlated assets. The
goal is to profit from relative price movements rather than overall market direction,
reducing exposure to market fluctuations.
 Let’s consider a practical example. Suppose you analyze two AI sector companies:
Company A has strong growth potential.
Company B is slowing down, with limited upside.option exercises their option, and you’re assigned—you must buy shares at $80,
even though they’re only worth $20. That’s a $60 per share loss.
But because you bought the $70 put as protection, you can now sell those shares at
$70, limiting your loss to $10 per share (the difference between the short and long
put strikes), minus the net credit you originally received.
This structure—collecting premium while using long options to cap risk—makes the
iron condor a defined-risk, nondirectional strategy. The protective aspect of buying
cheaper options to hedge against your sold options is called a credit spread .

164 CHAPTER  7Risk management
You short $100 of Company B’s stock and use the proceeds to buy Company A’s stock.
If the AI boom continues, Company A will grow significantly while Company B will
rise only slightly. Your trade is profitable, provided interest costs on your short posi-
tion don’t erode gains.
 Now, let’s explore a different scenario. Suppose the AI market crashes due to
competition from a Chinese AI firm or overvaluation concerns. If both stocks
decline, you lose on your long position but gain on your short position, potentially
offsetting losses.
 However, risks remain. Short selling incurs interest costs, and if your prediction is
wrong—Company A declines while Company B unexpectedly rises—you could face
amplified losses. Proper risk management is essential. Figure 7.5 outlines this princi-
ple, marking Company A as a rising star and Company B as a poor dog, which are the
Boston Consulting Group (BCG) Growth-Share Matrix classifications.
7.4.4 Risk pairing
Passion for innovation can drive investment decisions. Some see Small Modular Reac-
tors (SMRs) as the future of energy, while others envision carbon capture technolo-
gies such as direct-air capture becoming financial gold mines. However, investing in
emerging technologies is inherently risky.Long Position
Short Position$100
-$100+$40
+$20+$20
-$20
+$20+$40+$40-$20+$60
-$20-$60+$40Mixed Scenario Bullish Scenario
Bearish Scenario Mixed Scenario
Figure 7.5 The investors are long on A and short on B. In the bull case, the 
long position increases more than the short position, and the long gain minus 
the short loss is the profit. In a bear case, the short position loses more than 
the long position. The profit is the gain from the short position minus the loss 
in the long position.

165 7.5 Nonfinancial risk
 Yes, data centers require constant energy, and nuclear power is promising, but what
if SMRs fail to meet expectations or public sentiment stalls their adoption? Similarly,
direct-air capture aims to remove CO 2 from the atmosphere, but its success hinges on
reducing operational costs. What if that never happens?
 Balancing speculative bets with stable investments is a smart way to manage this
risk. The key is understanding your risk tolerance. For instance, if 80% of your portfo-
lio is in index funds and 20% in high-risk assets, even a total loss in the speculative
portion wouldn’t threaten your financial foundation. Over time, the growth of stable
investments can help absorb those losses, making risk more manageable. In addition,
you can use staged investing. Assuming that, as a developer, you have streaks of high
income, you can keep investing smaller portions into emerging technologies while
maintaining the 20% to 80% risk ratio.
7.5 Nonfinancial risk
Some risks aren’t reflected in a company’s financial statement and can be summed up as
nonfinancial risks. The subcategories are broad and may differ by industry. The overall
global economic situation, for instance, affects all companies. Economic downturns
harm companies unless a business model is targeted to perform well during crises.
 The 2020s are likely to be a decade that leads to more global challenges than many
other decades before. COVID-19 and geopolitical conflicts have created challenges in
many parts of the world. With the unfolding of social media and AI, we also witness
more extreme views. Many people speak about a very heated and aggressive situation
in many countries. They are afraid that a straw will break the camel’s back at some
point, and we’ll end up with big riots and unrest in which religious and political
extremists fight each other.
 Optimists might disagree with this view and assert that everything will be all right.
As an investor, you can remain impartial. Will there be unrest in country X? The cor-
rect answer might be “I don’t know!” Instead, we’re interested in the probability of
unrest. We need to find ways to quantify risks in numbers. Let’s explore potential
methods to measure nonfinancial risks, encompassing all risks not addressed by finan-
cial risk management.Catalysts and events
Hedging isn’t just about how—it’s about when.  Earnings calls are critical moments
for long-term investors. Brokers notify you in advance and provide analysts’ fore-
casts on potential price movements. Earnings calls can be make-or-break. Review-
ing transcripts—something GenAI can summarize—helps, but summaries alone
may not be enough.
Bad earnings? The stock drops. But is it a buying opportunity? That’s the real ques-
tion. So, as an investor, you want to always be on the lookout for special events that
might shift share prices more heavily in one or another direction.

166 CHAPTER  7Risk management
7.5.1 Markets
Market trends are commonly symbolized by two animals: the bull and the bear. These
aren’t just arbitrary animals; they symbolize specific movements in the market:
Bull market —The bull charges upward with its horns, symbolizing a rising market.
Stock prices are climbing, optimism is in the air, and investors feel confident. 
Bear market —The bear swipes downward with its paws, symbolizing a declining
market. Stock prices are dropping, uncertainty looms, and fear takes over. 
Some investors get overexcited during bull markets. They take too many risks to
replace good gains with exceptional gains. However, ignoring risks by picking random
securities that promise huge gains without looking into the details of those assets can
lead to a disaster.
 Some investors might tell you to ignore Mr. Market. If you’ve invested in solid
companies with a bright future, their share price may decrease during a bear mar-
ket, but the future looks bright in the long run. At the same time, you can’t ignore
that sometimes companies might get into serious trouble during a market crisis,
from which they can’t recover. Selling them as soon as possible is often the only
alternative to minimize permanent losses. Making the right decisions is hard. You
don’t have all the information you need, and psychological factors might affect you.
Looking at a position when it’s 20% below the purchase price still gives you the idea
that there can be a turnaround. But selling that position at 20% below the purchase
price is like acknowledging a loss. For many of us, this leads to negative emotions.
It’s human to push these feelings away and to keep the illusion that everything will
be good again at some point, even if some facts tell us that it would be better to walk
away with a slight loss.
 As a risk-taker, you might see a bear market as an opportunity to short sell assets.
This means you borrow shares from someone to sell them and repurchase them at a
lower price later. While famous investors, such as Michael Burry, became wealthy by
predicting the housing bubble crash in 2008, other investors had been wrong with
their predictions.
 Managing emotions and sticking to discipline and fact-based decision-making may
be key to being a good investor. Anyone who feels that they might not have the nerve
to stay disciplined during difficult times or knows they won’t be able to sleep when the
market is in turmoil should consider adjusting their strategy to their risk profile.
 Some investors try to sell growth stocks at the end of a bull run to stock up on
defensive stocks. Once the next bear market is over, you can repurchase growth stocks
at a lower price. This leads to one big question: Can we predict a bear or bull market?
7.5.2 Economic data
Some analysts try to look at economic data to predict a recession. One of these metrics
is the “10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Minus 2-Year Treasury Constant Maturity.”
Some investors see the spread between the yields on 10-year and 2-year US Treasury

167 7.5 Nonfinancial risk
bonds as a yield curve proxy indicator of a recession. Figure 7.6 shows a graph that
outlines these numbers.
Another indicator is the unemployment rate, which we can collect through the Fed-
eral Reserve Economic Data (FRED), as shown in figure 7.7. The more people are
employed, the greater the risk we face. We might exclude 2020, as the COVID-19 crisis
resulted from unforeseeable events.
10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Minus 2-Year Treasury Constant Maturity
Percent3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis via FRED®
Shaded areas indicate U.S. recessions.fred.stlouisfed.org1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025
Figure 7.6 The 10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Minus 2-Year Treasury Constant Maturity
Unemployment Rate
Percent15.0
12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics via FRED®
Shaded areas indicate U.S. recessions.fred.stlouisfed.org
Figure 7.7 Unemployment rate over the years

168 CHAPTER  7Risk management
The graph shows that unemployment gradually increased before most recessions.
Then, when the recession was here, it went up enormously.
 Reading charts can only give you indications. Whoever listens to podcasts and
interviews with experts will detect contradicting views. While some predict imminent
crises, others predict colossal growth.
7.5.3 Assessing nonfinancial risk
Public companies must report their numbers using predefined standards and would
be in trouble if they violated the regulations. Some accountants might try to disguise
some unpleasant details with tricks in their reporting, but experienced financial data
analysts have a framework in which they can interpret the numbers and decide if
something is off.
 We’ll investigate nonfinancial data in chapter 11 in more detail to explore how
we can integrate insights outside of financial statements into more advanced analy-
ses. For now, let’s start with the awareness that nonfinancial risks are defined by
what they are not. We might look for social media sentiments, weather data, and
other sources. Still, unlike financial data, no central data repository is available to
host all possible data to analyze nonfinancial risks. It wouldn’t even be clear what we
would need to store.
 Let’s reference the fictitious case study for ACME that we used to discuss options
trading. Let’s assume a disgruntled customer, Mr. Coyote, sues ACME Corporation
because their products don’t live up to the promises in the sales material. Let’s also
assume that his case gets some media coverage. How can we rate the reputation risk
for ACME? Experienced analysts may take similar cases from the past as a reference
and assess the reputation risk for ACME; others might analyze the sentiments on
social media posts related to the case. However, different analysts may come to differ-
ent conclusions.
 The ACME case study is most likely only relevant to one company. Let’s also look at
a systemic risk. Let’s assume a country gets a new political leader. We can analyze tran-
scripts of speeches and create sentiment analyses based on keywords. This way, we
might also detect hidden messages between the lines. We might also investigate the
election campaigns to determine who donated how much to this new leader to under-
stand his priorities further.
 Let’s assume this new leader is erratic, contradicts his predecessors, and does many
things differently. Some investors might view a country’s political leader as a risk to
the economy, while others may assume that he will stir up stagnation and do good
things. Maybe some companies will benefit while others suffer. It’s challenging to
translate behavior into risk. While many believe that a politician who is rude, aggres-
sive, and with plenty of evidence of narcissistic behavior must be a risk for every coun-
try, we might lack proof for what we might call common sense. Predicting the future
based on data requires enough historical data. As every leader of the past is a different
person who ruled under other circumstances, it’s hard to create an accurate model to

169 7.6 Portfolio optimization
compare current performance with past performance. Therefore, analyses based on
nonfinancial risks, especially politics-related ones, can be speculative: It’s likely harder
to predict the possible effect of a legal case or elections on a corporation’s share price
than assessing the financial risk of a company going bankrupt.
 One additional question is whether we’ll group nonfinancial risks into subgroups.
The following is one attempt:
Operational risks —System downtime, security breaches
Regulatory risks —Lawsuits, compliance fines
ESG risks —Environmental, social, and governance factors
Tech obsolescence —R&D spending, patent filings
Political risk —Country stability, trade restrictions
Reputation risk —Social media sentiment, brand issues
Management risk —CEO turnover, employee satisfaction
Professional investors and organizations, such as central banks, have more refined risk
taxonomies, which may be overkill for a private investor to study. We can also dive
deeper into specific risks. The current decade has experienced a pandemic, geopoliti-
cal conflicts, political paradigm shifts, and the effect of climate change through wild-
fires and hurricanes. Instead of asking on a generic level, such as what ESG risks a
company might face, we can also ask more concrete questions: How will climate
change affect that company’s business?
 We may consider two approaches to addressing the topic. We can develop individ-
ual scoring systems that collect data from various sources and build algorithms. If we
take our work seriously, we could write books about each risk type and company, as we
might consider building digital twins and simulating the effect of various catastrophes.
 As this is a lot of effort, we may use an alternative approach. In chapters 8 and 9,
we examine large language models (LLMs) in more detail. But if we agree that risk
assessments always contain room for error because there are unknowns, we can also
use LLMs for basic risk assessments, knowing that they might hallucinate. Even if we
need to review an LLM’s response, we might still discover patterns that are helpful in
our risk strategy. In chapter 8, we’ll also provide an example of how to assess non-
financial risks.
7.6 Portfolio optimization
Let’s explore how to optimize our portfolios. We can collect data and then define the
riskiness of individual positions. We can also use these techniques to create portfolios
that optimize risk and return rates. Let’s start by exploring the Markowitz-efficient
portfolio in detail.
7.6.1 Markowitz-efficient portfolio
A Markowitz-efficient portfolio is any portfolio that lies on the efficient frontier, as
defined by modern portfolio theory (MPT), introduced by Harry Markowitz in 1952.

170 CHAPTER  7Risk management
The efficient frontier  represents the set of optimal portfolios that offer the highest
expected return for a given level of risk (standard deviation). A portfolio is Markowitz-
efficient if there’s no other portfolio with a higher return for the same risk or a lower
risk for the same return. These portfolios are obtained by diversifying assets to mini-
mize variance while maintaining an optimal return. We do this by loading data in
memory, comparing past share price volatility and returns, and constructing a portfo-
lio that optimally balances risks and returns. 
 Let’s see how to create an efficient portfolio. In listing 7.2, we start by loading stock
data. For this example, we take Apple (AAPL), Walmart (WMT), Alphabet (GOOGL),
Coca-Cola (KO), Pfizer (PFE), Berkshire Hathaway (BRK-B), and NVIDIA (NVDA).
In the code, we collect data for three years.
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import yfinance as yf
from datetime import datetime, timedelta
def load_stocks(tickers, year_backs):
    start_date = datetime.today() - timedelta(days=365*year_backs) 
    end_date = datetime.today()
    stock_data = yf.download(tickers, start=start_date, 
end=end_date)['Close']
    return stock_data.pct_change().dropna()
tickers = ["AAPL", "WMT", "GOOGL", "KO", "PFE", "BRK-B", "NVDA"]
year_backs = 3
returns = load_stocks(tickers, year_backs)
After loading the data with the returns, we set up the parameters for calculating the
efficient frontier in listing 7.3. The number of trading days doesn’t equal the number
of yearly days, as we must factor in weekends and public holidays.
TRADING_DAYS = 252
mean_returns = returns.mean() * TRADING_DAYS    
cov_matrix = returns.cov() * TRADING_DAYS       
num_portfolios = 10000       
num_assets = len(tickers)    
port_returns = np.zeros(num_portfolios)
port_volatility = np.zeros(num_portfolios)
sharpe_ratios = np.zeros(num_portfolios)
all_weights = np.zeros((num_portfolios, num_assets))Listing 7.2 Collecting data for the Markowitz-efficient portfolio
Listing 7.3 Setting up variables
Annualized mean returns 
and covariance matrices
Number of portfolios 
to simulate

171 7.6 Portfolio optimization
It’s time to talk about the risk-free rate and the Sharpe ratio. The Sharpe ratio, devel-
oped by William F. Sharpe, is a performance measure used to evaluate the risk-adjusted
return of a portfolio. A higher Sharpe ratio means the portfolio has a better return per
unit of risk. A Markowitz-efficient portfolio doesn’t necessarily have the highest Sharpe
ratio. The tangency portfolio on the efficient frontier, which maximizes the Sharpe
ratio, is often the best portfolio when risk-free borrowing/lending is allowed.
 Think of the Sharpe ratio as a return-to-risk efficiency metric, which measures how
much helpful work a function does per unit of computational cost. In investing, it tells
you how much extra return you get per unit of risk taken.
 Some investments are de facto risk-free, ignoring black swan events; the assets can’t
go broke. The risk-free rate is the baseline where the lowest return can be found with
the least risk. If you have assets for which you expect lower returns but are at a higher
risk, these would be the first to be removed from a portfolio. So, every asset with a risk
must provide higher returns than an asset without risk. But what is a risk-free rate?
 A possible but wrong way to think of a risk-free rate is to consider the stock mar-
ket’s average, as shown in figure 7.8. Taking the returns since 1950, we get average
returns of approximately 9.21%. Even if we factor in a 3% inflation rate, we still get
solid returns.
A risk-free rate means I can trust that I’ll get x amount of money at a specific time.
Average returns on stock markets don’t help here. Instead, T-bills are assumed to have
zero default risk as the US government backs them. At the time of writing this book,
S&P 500 Annual Returns (%), 1950 to Present
40
20
0
−20
−40Annual Return (%)
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
Year
Figure 7.8 Market returns from 1950 until the present day

172 CHAPTER  7Risk management
the treasury bill rate was 4.22%. So, this is what we need to beat. The value fluctuates
significantly, so if you run these examples on your own, be sure to update the informa-
tion with the latest data.
NOTE In chapter 5, we show how to collect historical data for bonds.
Listing 7.4 creates a Markowitz-efficient portfolio. The first step is to set the risk-free
rate to 0.0422. We then run a Monte Carlo simulation for random portfolios to find a
good match. We store portfolios with all the assets and assign them random weights.
Then, we calculate the returns and volatilities based on these random portfolios. To
calculate the Sharpe ratio, we must subtract the risk-free rate from the returns and
then divide by volatility. In the final step, we get the optimal weights.
risk_free_rate = 0.0422
for i in range(num_portfolios):     
    weights = np.random.dirichlet(np.ones(num_assets), size=1).flatten()
    all_weights[i, :] = weights
    port_returns[i] = np.dot(weights, mean_returns)
    port_volatility[i] = np.sqrt(np.dot(weights.T, 
                                 np.dot(cov_matrix, weights)))
    sharpe_ratios[i] = (port_returns[i] - risk_free_rate) / 
port_volatility[i]
# 
max_sharpe_idx = np.argmax(sharpe_ratios)           
optimal_weights = all_weights[max_sharpe_idx, :]    
After calculating the optimal portfolio with the best Sharpe ratio, let’s look at the code
to plot the results in listing 7.5. We set the labels and highlight the best portfolio with
the highest maximum Sharpe ratio. We plot the results as a scatter plot.
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))                                  
plt.scatter(port_volatility, port_returns, c=sharpe_ratios,
            cmap='viridis', marker='o')                      
plt.colorbar(label='Sharpe Ratio')                           
plt.xlabel('Volatility (Risk)')                              
plt.ylabel('Expected Return')                                
plt.title('Efficient Frontier with Actual Stock Data')       
plt.scatter(port_volatility[max_sharpe_idx], 
            port_returns[max_sharpe_idx], 
            c='red', marker='*', s=200, 
            label='Max Sharpe Portfolio')    
plt.legend()                                 
plt.show()                                   Listing 7.4 Creating a Markowitz efficient portfolio
Listing 7.5 Plotting the efficient frontierMonte Carlo simulation 
for random portfolios
Finds the optimal 
Sharpe ratio portfolio
Sets plotting 
parameters
Plots a 
scatter plot

173 7.6 Portfolio optimization
Let’s look at the plot we created in figure 7.9. We see the random portfolios plotted.
Some portfolios would bring higher returns at a higher risk, but we’re interested in
the portfolio with the best risk-return ratio.
To get the portfolio with its weights, we need only to get the results in a DataFrame
and display them:
optimal_portfolio_df = pd.DataFrame({
    'Stock': tickers,
    'Optimal Weight': optimal_weights
})
print(optimal_portfolio_df)
Let’s look at the results, which, based on historical data, give us some insights about
the most efficient portfolio, as shown in table 7.6.
Table 7.6 Results of a Markowitz portfolio calculation
Stock Optimal weight
AAPL 0.045226
WMT 0.015196
Figure 7.9 Showing the efficient frontier with the portfolio with the best Sharpe ratio

174 CHAPTER  7Risk management
NVIDIA was a star performer over the past few years. And nobody would have expected
a portfolio with data from recent years in which NVIDIA wasn’t dominant. We also see
Pfizer as quite dominant, which might be logical considering COVID-19, in which
Pfizer had huge earnings through vaccine sales. We would have to buy and sell posi-
tions in our existing portfolio to use the insights until we have the weights as proposed
in table 7.6.
 We get different results if we change the risk-free rate and time horizon parame-
ters. Past performance may indicate possible future results, but the future remains
uncertain. Especially at the beginning of this decade, the world economy was enor-
mously affected by the pandemic and other global crises. Many investment firms that
estimate target prices of stocks are getting predictions wrong more often than before,
which underlines that we can’t eliminate uncertainty.
 Statistical methods can’t eliminate risks, but can help us manage them better. Fol-
lowing the best practices created by researchers such as Harry Markowitz enables us to
calculate likely gains and risks. Many may start their investment approach by looking
at single assets. They analyze single companies and pick likely performers based on
their expected earnings and other ratios. Investors who learn to analyze portfolios can
extend their approach. They still look for valuable companies and validate how new
assets fit into their portfolios. Sometimes, they might decide not to buy shares because
they don’t fit into what they already own.
7.6.2 Shiller P/E ratio
The Shiller P/E ratio (often also referred to as the CAPE ratio [cyclically adjusted
price-to-earnings ratio]) is a stock market valuation metric that smooths out earn-
ings fluctuations and gives a clearer picture of long-term market valuation. It helps
gauge stock market valuation. Using this method, you take the current price of a
stock or index, such as the S&P 500, as the numerator. You use the average real
(inflation-adjusted) earnings over the past 10 years for the denominator. The pur-
pose of this 10-year smoothing is to eliminate short-term noise from economic or
market disruptions.GOOGL 0.005023
KO 0.004842
PFE 0.293244
BRK-B 0.000245
NVDA 0.636224Table 7.6 Results of a Markowitz portfolio calculation  (continued)
Stock Optimal weight

175 7.6 Portfolio optimization
 High CAPE ratios suggest overvaluation, while low ratios suggest undervaluation.
We can track and monitor the CAPE ratio for broad indices (e.g., S&P 500). Then, we
can decide what to do next. We can adjust equity allocation based on CAPE:
High CAPE (overvalued market) —Reduce equity exposure and shift to bonds, gold,
or alternatives.
Low CAPE (undervalued market) —Increase equity exposure.
Let’s look at an example. The historical average CAPE ratio for the S&P 500 is around
16–18. The market may be overheated if the CAPE exceeds this range (e.g., > 30). A
low CAPE (e.g., < 10) may suggest buying opportunities.
 We must still be aware that a CAPE ratio is an indication, but not a definitive pre-
diction. A high CAPE ratio doesn’t mean a crash is imminent, and a low CAPE doesn’t
guarantee immediate gains. 
 We must also be aware of limitations. Economic changes, such as structural shifts
(e.g., lower interest rates or changing tax laws), can influence what a “fair” CAPE
might be today compared to historical norms. Sector composition is also a topic. The
composition of indices changes over time (e.g., tech-heavy markets today versus indus-
trial-heavy in the past), which can skew CAPE comparisons.
 For long-term investors, CAPE is a tool for assessing potential future returns over a
decade or more, not short-term trades. It also helps them stay grounded during peri-
ods of market exuberance or pessimism. In short, the CAPE ratio provides a historical
perspective on market valuation, assisting investors in making informed decisions
about risk and reward. We can collect the ratio for stock exchanges from web pages, as
shown in figure 7.10.
Shiller CAPE (Cyclically Adjusted Price-to-Earnings) Ratio for S&P 500
DateCape Ratio45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020Current: 36.06 (2025-06)
Figure 7.10 Shiller CAPE ratio per month

176 CHAPTER  7Risk management
The Shiller CAPE ratio is high on this chart, which could indicate that the market is
overvalued. Someone with strong views on the validity of this indicator would tell us to
get out of equities. But this is just one interpretation out of many. Others may see
more room to grow. Some might see an upcoming market correction, but until then,
you can still gain a lot. The hard truth is that financial experts often contradict them-
selves; after all, it’s up to you to decide whom you want to believe.
 Some investors combine Markowitz-efficient portfolios with the CAPE ratio. They
use the CAPE ratio for macro allocation and adjust the stock/bond allocation based
on CAPE. When CAPE is high, they reduce the stock exposure to lower drawdown
risk. When balancing the portfolios, they use the Sharpe ratio for micro-optimization.
Here’s an example: 
If CAPE is low (e.g., < 20), allocate 80% to equities and 20% to bonds.
If CAPE is high (e.g., > 30), allocate 50% to equities, 30% to bonds, and 20%
to gold.
Within the equity portion, they optimize weights using the Sharpe ratio. As with every
strategy, there are exceptions and risks.
7.6.3 Rebalancing
Rebalancing  is the process of adjusting the weights of assets in a portfolio to maintain
the desired asset allocation over time. It helps control risk, optimize returns, and pre-
vent drift from the original investment strategy.
 Rebalancing is important. Market movements cause asset weights to shift away
from the target allocation. We also want to manage risks to prevent overexposure to
certain well-performing assets (reducing concentration risk) and optimize returns to
ensure that gains are captured and reinvested according to the original strategy.
There are three main strategies for rebalancing:
Periodic rebalancing (time-based) —Rebalance on predefined intervals.
Threshold-based rebalancing (percentage-based) —Rebalance only when an asset devi-
ates by a certain percentage from the target allocation (e.g., ±5% drift).
Hybrid approach (time + threshold) —Combine both methods.
A hybrid approach often works best. We must remember that too-frequent rebal-
ances cost money. Each sell and buy order leads to transaction costs and maybe tax
consequences.
 In addition, we can consider different methods of rebalancing. One way is to buy
and sell from positions within a portfolio to return to optimal weight. In that case, we
calculate the efficient portfolio at a specific time. Let’s say we rebalance quarterly.
Then, we run our algorithms, sell those underperforming assets, and buy more of
those that performed well.
 

177 7.6 Portfolio optimization
Investors with a strong cash flow, such as programmers who make a lot of money by
working on projects, can also decide to balance by making optimal buy decisions.
They deposit new cash into their brokerage account and run the algorithms, but
instead of selling weak positions, they buy recommended stocks with the new money.
 Let’s look at some code. We take the basis allocation from the results we collected
from the efficient portfolio:
target_allocation = {
"AAPL":        0.016804,
"WMT":        0.007427,
"GOOGL":        0.015956,
"KO":        0.142700,
"PFE":        0.193730,
"BRK-B":        0.009315,
"NVDA":        0.614068
}
In this model, we assume we’ve invested in all stocks equally in dollars (although this
is unlikely, but we need to start somewhere). As you’ve learned how to collect data
from your brokers in chapter 6, feel free to load it and use these positions as a base:
import pandas as pd
current_portfolio = {
"AAPL":        10000,
"WMT":        10000,
"GOOGL":        10000,
"KO":        10000,
"PFE":        10000,
"BRK-B":        10000,
"NVDA":        10000,
}
Before we go into more detail, let’s set up some parameters. We need to map our cur-
rent portfolio to the weights in listing 7.6. We set a threshold of 0.05 and sum up all
values. Then, we review each position and set the current allocation based on weights.
 
 Selling underperformers and buying overperformers
If we rebalance, we must define rules for what to sell and buy. One of the best invest-
ment practices is buying more high-performers and selling low-performers, which
might contradict our instinct to hold on to stocks that have lost value in the hope that
they will rebound.
At the same time, we need to be aware of not tuning our algorithms in a way that
risks de-diversifying. Imagine you have one superstar in your portfolio that grows far
more than any other stock. Some algorithms might conclude that selling the rest and
buying only the superstar would be best.

178 CHAPTER  7Risk management
threshold = 0.05   
total_value = sum(current_portfolio.values())
current_allocation = {stock: value / total_value 
                      for stock, value 
                      in current_portfolio.items()}    
Now, we can calculate the deviations in listing 7.7 from our target allocation and iden-
tify the rebalancing actions. We review all stocks with a higher deviation than the
threshold defined before and calculate the required adjustments.
dev = {
    stock: current_allocation[stock] 
    - target_allocation[stock] 
    for stock in target_allocation
}                                      
rebalance_needed = {
    stock: value 
    for stock, value in dev.items() 
    if abs(value) > threshold
}                                      
adjustments = {}                                             
for stock in rebalance_needed:                               
    target_value = target_allocation[stock] * total_value    
    current_value = current_portfolio[stock]                 
    adjustments[stock] = target_value - current_value        
In the last step, we must put everything in a DataFrame and analyze the results to cre-
ate a DataFrame that holds buy and sell recommendations:
rebalance_df = pd.DataFrame({
    "Stock": list(adjustments.keys()),
    "Current Value ($)": [
        current_portfolio[stock] 
        for stock in adjustments
    ],
    "Target Value ($)": [
        target_allocation[stock] * total_value
        for stock in adjustments
    ],
    "Adjustment ($)": [
        adjustments[stock] 
        for stock in adjustments
    ],
    "Action": [
        "Buy" if adj > 0 else "Sell" Listing 7.6 Rebalancing preparation
Listing 7.7 Calculate required adjustmentsDefines the rebalancing 
threshold (e.g., 5% 
deviation from target)
Computes current 
allocations based 
on the weights
Finds 
rebalancing
Defines sell and 
buy actions

179 Summary
        for adj in adjustments.values()
    ]
})
With that, we get some results, as shown in table 7.7. We must create four sell and two
buy orders to balance our portfolio. Keep in mind that most portfolios can’t be ideally
matched. This is especially true if you own high-priced shares in a company and your
broker doesn’t allow you to sell fractions of a share (at the time of writing this chapter,
a few brokers still don’t support it). If one share is around $1000, such as BlackRock,
selling half a share is often impossible.
Summary
Ukemi  is a term borrowed from martial arts. In this chapter, we use it to raise
awareness of the importance of learning to deal with possible setbacks before
taking risks.
Stop-loss orders can be the most efficient loss protection tool. You instruct your
broker to sell the position once it reaches a specific price.
“Bikeshedding,” or Parkinson’s Law of Triviality, tells you about the risk of over-
looking the most significant threats as you get distracted by trivial topics.
Bull markets represent growth markets, and bear markets are markets of decline.
Often, the challenge is less to create a well-performing portfolio during good
times, but to minimize losses during bad times. Value at Risk (VaR) calculates
how much you can likely lose in extreme cases in a period. We can use Monte
Carlo simulations to measure the VaR of stocks.
Correlation in the context of two share prices means their price movements are
often interlinked. If stock A goes up, so does stock B, in most cases.
We can use past returns and variances to determine risks. Then, we can select a
portfolio of many stocks to produce the desired mix of expected risk-adjusted
returns.
We can use Monte Carlo simulations to calculate efficient portfolios. 
Human psychology is a significant risk factor when investing.Table 7.7 Rebalancing actions 
Stock Current value Target value Adjustment Action
AAPL 10,000 1,176.28 –8,823.72 Sell
WMT 10,000 519.89 –9,480.11 Sell
GOOGL 10,000 1,116.92 –8,883.08 Sell
PFE 10,000 13,561.1 3,561.10 Buy
BRK-B 10,000 652.05 –9,347.95 Sell
NVDA 10,000 42,984.76 32,984.76 Buy

180 CHAPTER  7Risk management
Hedging describes practices to protect oneself against risk using techniques
and assets such as derivatives, diversification, pair trading, or risk pairing.
Derivatives are like insurance against changing prices. Some derivative traders
also use them to create additional income.
Diversification is essential but requires a deep understanding of the assets
within one portfolio that might correlate.
Pair trading is the idea of offsetting risk by going long in one position and short
in another.
Risk pairing means pairing risky investments with less risky assets.
Nonfinancial risks comprise all risks without a direct link to finance. This
broad category includes issues caused by geopolitical changes or overall mar-
ket movements.
You might be unable to protect yourself against all nonfinancial risks, as this cate-
gory is vast, but you can identify the most concerning risks through a risk matrix.
One way to protect a business against nonfinancial risks is by keeping a margin
of safety and preparing for risks by anticipating worst-case scenarios.
Some companies are more resilient against market movements than others.
The beta ratio measures a stock’s volatility relative to the overall market. The
lower a stock’s beta, the more resilient it is against market movements.
Some investors see macroeconomic data, such as unemployment rates and the
10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Minus the 2-Year Treasury Constant Matu-
rity, as indicators of possible recessions.
Past performance indicates a possible future performance, but doesn’t guaran-
tee it.
Having multiple assets in a portfolio, with past returns for possible gains and
past share price volatility as risk, allows us to create strategies.
The Markowitz efficient portfolio recommends optimal weights in your portfo-
lio based on historical data. These weights—in a closer sense, the distribution
of shares within a portfolio—can be calculated through Monte Carlo simulation
and reflect the optimal risk and return rate.
The Shiller P/E ratio, also known as the CAPE ratio, is a valuation measure that
uses real earnings per share over 10 years to smooth out fluctuations in corporate
profits. It’s often used to assess if a market, such as the S&P 500, is overvalued.
Portfolios often become skewed with time. To overcome this, they need to be
rebalanced. However, rebalancing too frequently can accumulate substantial
transaction costs.

181AI for financial research
Let’s start this chapter with a radical idea: What if we stopped using code for finan-
cial research and relied on generative AI (GenAI) chatbots for investment advice?
We can ask a large language model (LLM) questions such as “I am a risk-averse
investor, and I want to invest in stocks in the Information Technology sector. What
are three stocks with maximized returns and minimized risks?” Would you buy the
three recommended stocks without additional due diligence?
 This chapter examines the discriminative applications of machine learning
(ML) in finance in the first part. We’ll highlight the limitations of linear regression
and similar algorithms in chaotic systems, such as stock prices, which often lack pat-
terns and are typically characterized by “random walks.” We’ll also outline how
these algorithms can be used meaningfully in more isolated scenarios.This chapter covers
The challenges of using machine learning 
to predict stock prices
Research investments with large language 
models
Submitting prompts to large language models 
with Python
Using prompt engineering to improve our queries

182 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
 When introducing LLMs later in the chapter, we’ll emphasize that mindlessly fol-
lowing an LLM’s investment advice is risky due to the potential for hallucinations
and outdated information. We will, however, highlight the usefulness of GenAI in
financial research, particularly when seeking to gain a deeper understanding of a
company that presents an investment opportunity. In simplified terms, instead of
getting particular investment advice based on a generic question, such as “Recom-
mend me three stocks,” we can pass more detailed inquiries such as, “Tell me about
the management style of the management board of company X.” With answers to a
lot of company details, we can build an individual scorecard about a company to
make an investment decision.
 We’ll demonstrate how to integrate LLMs from organizations such as Google (Gem-
ini) and OpenAI (GPT), as well as open source models from Hugging Face, and how to
configure specific parameters for these models. While the book has been programming-
oriented to this point, we’ll now find out how to automate insight generation.
8.1 From code to machine learning
In the past chapters, we’ve demonstrated how to analyze companies to hypothesize
which ones are better suited for investment. Regardless of our algorithms and
strategies, we can justify our actions if our approach is grounded in evidence-based
decision-making.
NOTE Using terms such as hypothesize  instead of stronger words, such as judge ,
can serve as a reminder to stay aware of the room for error. Even the most
successful investors have misjudged investment opportunities in the past, and
it’s helpful to remember that we often follow assumptions when investing in
volatile assets. Overconfidence in your ability to predict the future is a form of
self-deception that can lead to unexpected losses and painful lessons.
Using computer-generated models trained on vast historical data, we delegate deci-
sion-making processes to algorithms at an advanced stage of automation. Humans
might not even understand why the model decided to buy or sell, as they are black
boxes. Investors will appreciate sophisticated trading algorithms that automate prof-
its, but a trading bot that incurs losses after market changes is a trader’s nightmare.
Let’s delve into the details of traditional ML to gain a deeper understanding.
Behavioral finance
The works of Robert F. Shiller, Daniel Kahneman, Amos Tversky, and others have
shown that investors often act irrationally. Reading up on biases and deeply ingrained
behavioral patterns, such as loss aversion, makes us wonder if our emotions and
unconscious behavior might be our biggest obstacle to financial freedom. 
We can compare this situation to information security. If the human factor is the biggest
challenge, solving the human factor is the solution. This brings us to an interesting

183 8.1 From code to machine learning
ML involves statistical algorithms that learn from data and perform tasks without
requiring explicit instructions. These algorithms can be categorized into trained mod-
els that use supervised  and unsupervised learning .
 Supervised ML models are trained with labeled data. Imagine a dataset that con-
tains quantifiable financial data about a company in columns, which are called fea-
tures, tagged with an indication of whether the stock price is higher or lower one year
later—the label. With a supervised learning algorithm, we can train a model that pre-
dicts whether a stock will increase or decrease in value when the model is fed unla-
beled data. Depending on the direction of the stock price, we can label the stock as
“buy,” “sell,” or “hold.” We can also classify stocks as strong buy or strong sell if an anal-
ysis concludes that the stock might move above average when we compare the expected
performance with other stocks. This example represents a classification  approach.
Another similar approach is regression ; instead of classifying as buy or sell, we estimate
the stock price changes in percentage terms (returns) over one year.
NOTE In investment theory, the term factor  is used for parameters that can
affect trade decisions, such as value, size, momentum, quality, or volatility. Fac-
tors are typical candidates for features in analytical datasets for data models.
To train a model, we need labeled data, but what if the data isn’t labeled? Unsupervised
learning is about finding structure in data, and we’re successful if we can find ways to
label the data meaningfully. Shares of companies are a perfect textbook example to illus-
trate the applications of unsupervised learning, as we can extract two key values from the
time series data on share prices: returns and volatility. We’ll illustrate in the upcoming
example how to plot this data and create labels by clustering the data on the plot.
 Identifying outliers —assets with distinct values from others—can bring value to
investors with a higher risk appetite. We’ve found an asset that might behave differ-
ently from other assets on the market. If we strongly believe in the stock’s growth or
decline hypothesis, we might buy or short sell it.
 Investment firms use ML to analyze stocks. They collect historical data and forecast
earnings, revenue growth, and, of course, stock prices. Financial data providers often
provide investors with an average of the forecasts of different companies. Figure 8.1
shows the NVIDIA price forecast based on data collected via yfinance.
 In this figure, we collected someone else’s forecasts and plotted them. As past per-
formance doesn’t guarantee future results, forecasts can be wrong. To improve the
likelihood of success when deciding based on analyst forecasts, details on historical
performance facilitate decision-making. The more successful selected analysts have
been in the past, the more likely it is that their next forecast is solid too. Sharing thequestion: Do we save ourselves from our biases if we let computers do the trading?
We’ll show that eliminating the human risk factor by reducing investment decisions
to ML algorithms also faces some challenges.

184 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
historical performance of investment analysts who shared their insights is one of the
key features of paid pro subscription services of financial analyst platforms.
 We also want to understand how to create models ourselves to predict prices.
Before investigating that, let’s explore how to use unsupervised learning.
8.1.1 Unsupervised learning example
Stock market indices are often used as an entry point to analyze individual stocks, as
they already list a preselection of promising stocks. The S&P 500, for example, tracks
the stock performance of 500 of the largest companies listed on US stock exchanges.
It would be inefficient to examine each stock in the index manually. Let’s see if we can
improve our results using Python code.
 What if we clustered stocks by performance and picked more interesting ones for
us? We focus on stocks with excellent past returns and explore them first. Let’s load
the S&P data to visualize stocks based on their performance using code. The following
code retrieves the tickers of S&P 500 constituents from Wikipedia using Pandas to
parse HTML pages:
sp500_url = 'https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_S%26P_500_companies'
data_table = pd.read_html(sp500_url)
tickers = data_table[0]['Symbol'].values.tolist()
tickers = [s.replace('\n', '') for s in tickers]
tickers = [s.replace('.', '-') for s in tickers]
tickers = [s.replace(' ', '') for s in tickers]
Price
2025-01 2025-03 2025-05 2025-07 2025-09 2025-11 2026-01 2026-03 2026-05 2026-07
DateNVIDIA one-year price forecast
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
2026-09Closing Price
high +37.67%
mean +1.98%
low -44.93%
Figure 8.1 One-year price forecasts for NVIDIA based on data collected via yfinance, divided into high, low, and 
mean

185 8.1 From code to machine learning
In the second step, we load all constituent performances from the current year. We
iterate through the tickers and load stock price data in listing 8.1. For each stock, we
load one year of data.
prices_list = []
start_date = datetime.now() - timedelta(days=365)
for ticker in tickers:                             
    prices = yf.download(ticker, 
                         start=start_date, 
                         interval="1d")['Close']   
    prices = pd.DataFrame(prices)                  
    prices.columns = [ticker]                      
    prices_list.append(prices)                     
prices_df = pd.concat(prices_list,axis=1)
prices_df.sort_index(inplace=True)
returns = pd.DataFrame()
returns['Returns'] = prices_df.pct_change().mean() * 252   
returns['Volatility'] = (prices_df.pct_change().std() 
                        * sqrt(252))                       
NOTE In the code here, 252 represents the trading days per year. Stock
exchanges are closed on weekends and public holidays. Therefore, the num-
ber of trading days is lower than the total number of days per year.
Using this code so far, we have a data structure that contains the returns and the vola-
tility aggregated by a year. While the purpose of the returns is clear (we want to maxi-
mize our gains), volatility represents risks. The greater the fluctuation in a stock’s
value, the higher the risk.
NOTE Is high volatility also a risk, if an ongoing upward momentum causes sub-
stantial price changes? We need to verify that your soaring stock isn’t part of a
bubble and check ratios to see if a high valuation after a rally remains justified.
K-means clustering is a vector quantization method to partition data into clusters. By
grouping data by values, we can create labels. A central parameter for this algorithm is
the number of clusters we want to make. An elbow curve, as shown in the following
code, helps us determine the optimal number of clusters. Listing 8.2 illustrates how to
do this, and the results are presented in figure 8.2.
data = np.asarray([np.asarray(returns['Returns']),
                   np.asarray(returns['Volatility'])]).T
distortions = []
for k in range(2, 20):
    k_means = KMeans(n_clusters=k)Listing 8.1 Calculating returns and volatility
Listing 8.2 Calculating elbow curveLoads historical 
price data
Calculates returns 
and volatility

186 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
    k_means.fit(data)
    distortions.append(k_means.inertia_)
    
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(15, 5))
plt.plot(range(2, 20), distortions)
plt.grid(True)
plt.title('Elbow curve')
Figure 8.2 illustrates the outcome of the elbow curve. Here, we also see a dent in the
chart that gives the curve its name.
Based on that graph, we pick a number close to the elbow of the curve, which is a
point where the curve visibly bends. The elbow represents a cutoff point, indicating
that the diminishing returns aren’t worth the additional costs. It’s therefore an opti-
mal parameter. In the following example, we use 5. Let’s create the data for this clus-
ter using the source code in listing 8.3, which uses the K-means algorithm.
centroids,_ = kmeans(data, 5)
idx,_ = vq(data,centroids)
details = [(name,cluster) for name, cluster in zip(returns.index,idx)]
details_df = pd.DataFrame(details)
details_df.columns = ['Ticker','Cluster']
clusters_df = returns.reset_index()
clusters_df['Cluster'] = details_df['Cluster']
clusters_df.columns = ['Ticker', 'Returns', 'Volatility', 'Cluster']
Listing 8.4 shows how to plot the data. Stock tickers can be seen if we hover the mouse
over the dots on the plot visualized in figure 8.3. It’s possible to add the labels for eachListing 8.3 Creating clusters
Elbow curve
2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5
Number of clusters25
20
15
10
5Percent of variance explained
Figure 8.2 Elbow curve indicating the number of clusters for one year of data until May 13, 2025

187 8.1 From code to machine learning
stock, but with 500 constituents, the diagram would be too crowded with small text
labels.
fig = px.scatter(clusters_df, x="Returns", 
                 y="Volatility", color="Cluster", hover_data=["Ticker"])
fig.update(layout_coloraxis_showscale=False)
fig.update_traces(
    marker=dict(size=8, symbol="diamond", 
                line=dict(width=2, color="DarkSlateGrey"))
)
fig.show()
This example demonstrates the application of unsupervised learning to categorize
stocks into clusters based on shared characteristics. If we interactively examine this
scatterplot, we can draw conclusions by exploring each dot. We can explore each asset
and decide which one to investigate further. We can, for example, review the three
outliers. The dot on the left (Moderna) could be an interesting option if we look for
companies that can undergo a turnaround. We may also choose high-performing
assets to pick winners that can grow further and explore the dot on the right, such as
Palantir. We’re also interested in the stock with the highest volatility, which in the scat-
terplot is Super Micro Computer. Regardless of the strategy we use, being able to
hover over each dot provides a more straightforward overview of the differences in
the assets available to us.
 Unsupervised learning helps us better understand assets. Let’s examine supervised
learning to determine whether it can predict stock future performance.
8.1.2 Supervised learning example
Unsupervised learning helps us bring meaning to chaos by structuring vast data. Once
labeled data is available, it’s time to think about the next steps, which leads us toListing 8.4 Plotting
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2Volatility
−1.5−
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
ReturnsFigure 8.3 A plot with four clusters. 
Hovering with the mouse over the 
single dots reveals each ticker.

188 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
supervised learning. Let’s build an analytical dataset using these labels and learn how
to predict which companies are likely to become winners.
BUILDING  AN ANALYTICAL  DATASET
Based on the previous scatterplot, we can create labeled datasets. Each stock, repre-
sented by the ticker, is part of a cluster. The cluster with the highest returns in the
exploration before contains the tickers PLTR (Palantir), GEV (GE Vernova), AXON
(Axon Enterprise), TPL (Texas Pacific Land Corporation), TSLA (Tesla), VST (Vistra
Corp), NRG (NRG Energy), TPR (Tapestry Inc), AVGO (Broadcom), PODD (Insulet
Corporation), and HWM (Howmet Aerospace). We can use this grouping as a label
for all tickers in the dataset.
 We have identifiers (tickers) and labels (clusters); now we need to identify the fea-
tures associated with these identifiers. In this use case, we must create a 2D analytical
dataset to run a supervised ML algorithm on data, such as linear regression. Think of
a traditional database table with columns representing the features  we want to investi-
gate. One additional column represents the label or the outcome; in this case, it’s the
cluster. Here, the ticker serves as the unique primary key. We want to use supervised
ML algorithms to find correlations between the values of the features and the labels
with the help of a significant amount of data. In figure 8.4, we outline using super-
vised ML to find promising stocks using linear regression. The challenge is to select
the best features from a vast list of potential candidates.
Every quantifiable aspect that can, at least in theory, affect a share price can become a
feature in an analytical dataset. We can pick features based on financial data such asTicker Label Features  (1 to n)
PLTR Cluster 1
GEV Cluster 1
NVDA Cluster 2
……Company FeaturesEarningsFeature Candidates
PriceTrading Volatility
Social Media Score
Other FeaturesInﬂation
Interest RateGlobal Stability Score ?
Figure 8.4 A labeled dataset for which we need to select features. Each feature will represent one 
column.

189 8.1 From code to machine learning
historical share prices, expenses, or earnings. During feature selection, we can go far
beyond corporate data, including financial and nonfinancial data. We can include
macroeconomic data such as the unemployment rate, inflation, or economic growth
as features. Some features can also be specific to ML models for certain sectors, such
as weather data for companies whose success depends on it, like those in the agricul-
tural industry.
NOTE The more specific attributes we use, the narrower our scope needs to
be. If we use weather as a feature, we must incorporate only companies that
rely on weather data, such as those in the agricultural industry. Otherwise, if
most companies are unaffected by weather data, we exacerbate the signal-to-
noise problem.
Choosing the label—the intended outcome—is easier than selecting features, as we
aim to identify company stocks with rising share prices. Once we’ve chosen the
desired features, we construct a time series dataset using these features. We also need
to determine a suitable time interval for assessing price movements. Stock markets are
highly volatile, so using ML to predict movements in short time frames, such as days
or a few weeks, isn’t advisable. At the same time, for some industries, having a time
interval that is too large can also be troublesome, as some changes within the time
interval may render certain features obsolete (consider how the emergence of AI
reshuffled the cards for some companies). Candidates for time intervals could be
quarters, semiannual periods, or annual periods.
 The next step is to collect and aggregate historical data. Suppose we decided on a
one-year time frame. We then collect data from all the companies in our analysis from
one year ago. Once we have this dataset, we run supervised ML algorithms.
 When we have enough data, we split the data sample into two groups: training data
and test data. We use a ML algorithm, specifically a linear regression algorithm, to
train the model using the training data. In simplified terms, the algorithm processes
the data and identifies correlations between the features and the label.
 After the training, we can use this model for inference. We feed an unlabeled data-
set to the model, and the model returns a likely outcome. As we’ve kept the test data
aside, we can now test our model. The more the model’s inference matches the labels,
the more accurate our model is.
 Many hedge funds base their stock selection on this approach. However, practical
wisdom also suggests that if a few features were sufficient to predict prices and success
were easy, every book exploring financial investment would begin with a chapter on
ML. Succeeding using ML can lead to vast profits, but it’s also hard. Let’s look at some
details on why being successful in this field goes beyond a showcase.
 The cluster we created contains one year of data up to May 13, 2025. This portfolio
shows a diverse range of businesses across stable sectors, including industrials and con-
sumer discretionary, in clusters containing shares whose prices have grown. If we cre-
ated a cluster with one year of data up to January 1, the cluster containing profitable
shares would likely include a far greater number of stocks in the technology sector.

190 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
NOTE The code in the download section of this book allows you to use differ-
ent end dates to create clusters.
So, what happened? A new US president with new policies shook up the stock market.
When the tariff policies were announced, the share prices of technology stocks that
depend more on other international markets were more affected than those of com-
panies such as Texas Pacific Land Corporation, whose business is less dependent on
international trade. Consequently, we must remain flexible and consider training mul-
tiple models in parallel.
 Another challenge is the volume of data and the associated data preparation. In
this example, we used the S&P 500, which is a collection of successful companies.
The business model of hedge funds is to generate substantial returns for clients, pro-
viding a solid foundation for the fund manager to enrich themselves through fees.
The smaller the company, the greater the chance of profits. Therefore, we need to
investigate companies beyond the S&P 500. Collecting and aggregating data is a sig-
nificant topic in big data. Depending on the number of features you want to support,
you must build data pipelines to load data from various sources, including social
media, financial documents, and many more. Having a vast amount of data also
requires many resources to process it. Lastly, overfitting is one of the challenges of
supervised learning and ML. ML models still face the challenge of distinguishing the
signal from the noise.
 If you come up with great ideas and possess the skills in ML, there’s still consider-
able room to create ML models that perform well. However, let’s consider a simpler
scenario for a showcase instead.
STOCK PRICE  PREDICTION
We’ll outline this approach with a reference example that uses a random forest algo-
rithm in listing 8.5. In the preceding example, we outlined the use of several funda-
mentals to predict the outcome. This was great to explain the power of supervised
learning, but we want to use a more straightforward and reproducible scenario for a
practical approach using historical pricing data. We load data through yfinance, as
we’ve done before. The interesting aspect is to define a label by setting the column
target with the next day’s price. This way, we create a training dataset.
import yfinance as yf
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestRegressor
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.metrics import mean_squared_error
from statsmodels.tsa.arima.model import ARIMA
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
start_date = "2018-01-01"
end_date = "2023-01-01"Listing 8.5 Loading data for the random forest

191 8.1 From code to machine learning
ticker ="AAPL"
df = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(start=start_date, end=end_date)
df = df[["Open", "High", "Low", "Close", "Volume"]]
df["Target"] = df["Close"].shift(-1)
df.dropna(inplace=True)
Now, it’s time to split our data into training data and test data. In listing 8.6, we first
define the datasets X and the labels y. We use 80% of the training data, leaving 20%
for testing to validate the model. We collect the output. The variable rf_rmse  contains
the root mean-squared error, which indicates the model’s accuracy based on valida-
tion using the test data.
X = df.drop(columns=["Target"])
y = df["Target"]
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, shuffle=False,
                                                    test_size=0.2)
rf_model = RandomForestRegressor(n_estimators=100, random_state=42)
rf_model.fit(X_train, y_train)
rf_preds = rf_model.predict(X_test)
rf_rmse = np.sqrt(mean_squared_error(y_test, rf_preds))
results = pd.DataFrame({
    "Date": df.index[-len(y_test):],
    "Actual": y_test.values,
    "RandomForest": rf_preds,
}).set_index("Date")
Listing 8.7 lets us plot the results. The x-axis represents the data, and the y-axis rep-
resents the price. 
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
plt.plot(results.index, results["Actual"], label="Actual", linewidth=2)
plt.plot(results.index, results["RandomForest"], label="Random Forest", 
alpha=0.7, linestyle="dashed")
plt.title("Stock Price Prediction: Random Forest")
plt.xlabel("Date")
plt.ylabel("Price")
plt.legend()
plt.grid(True)
plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
Figure 8.5 shows the differences between the forecast and the actual values, which
underline that inaccuracies sometimes occur and are sometimes more pronounced
than others. If you experiment with data, you may often run into scenarios where pre-
dictions are inaccurate. Sometimes, the solution is to use more data. You can also tryListing 8.6 Training data for the random forest
Listing 8.7 Plotting the results

192 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
other ML algorithms, such as AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA),
which may yield more accurate results on several occasions.
We can compare a reliable model for forecasting stock prices with the Midas Touch,
an allegory for the ability to make people extremely rich quickly. Although a few enti-
ties, such as RenTech (we’ll fill you in on this company a bit later), are said to have this
capability, building efficient stock forecasting algorithms is tough. Let’s look at the
challenges.
8.1.3 Market challenges
The financial market provides advantages and disadvantages for ML use cases. One
advantage is the quality of data and access to audited data. Those who want to show-
case ML can use financial data more easily than any other data source for simple
demonstrations.
 The financial market also presents challenges for ML use cases. Let’s start with the
efficient market theory and explore other aspects that make forecasting prices more
difficult.
EFFICIENT  MARKET  THEORY
The efficient market theory  posits that the price of an asset accurately reflects its intrinsic
value, given that investors have access to all relevant information. This leads to one of
the most debated and controversial theories in finance: nobody can beat the market
Stock Price Prediction: Random Forest
180
170
160
150
140
130Price
2021-01 2022-03 2022-05 2022-07 2022-09 2022-11 2023-01
DateActual
Random Forest
Figure 8.5 This difference between actual and forecasted prices shows that, in some cases, the predictions are 
more accurate than others.

193 8.1 From code to machine learning
in the long run by purchasing undervalued stocks. Warren Buffett and other investors
who outperformed the stock indices disagree.
 Suppose we agree that we may not find any undervalued stocks of well-established
companies. In that case, we can only outperform the market if we identify newcomers
that will surpass others through a hidden advantage that we can reveal through new
analytical approaches. In his “Do Stocks Outperform Treasury Bills?” paper ( https:/ /
mng.bz/KwrZ ), Hendrik Bessembinder showed that most stocks of the historical stock
market had negative cumulative returns. A few companies that create exceptional
returns enable the stock market to outperform the average returns of other assets,
such as bonds. Many investors have searched for decades for companies with “a secret
sauce.” However, if we sought features in a ML model that would reveal hidden quali-
ties in a company, ML models based on past performance numbers would likely only
provide limited assistance.
RANDOM  WALK
A random walk  describes how the stock market often doesn’t follow deterministic rules
but does exhibit chaotic behavior. Benjamin Graham, Warren Buffett’s mentor, cre-
ated the allegory of Mr. Market, in which he compares the stock market to a person
with manic-depressive traits. Changes in single markets, such as the US market, the
world’s largest, can impact other markets worldwide. This makes prediction even more
complex. Because stock prices depend significantly on mass psychology, attempting to
predict human emotions on a global scale through ML ultimately leads to speculative
approaches, akin to consulting the stars.
 The phrase “irrational exuberance,” coined by Alan Greenspan and often used by
Yale professor Robert Shiller, outlines that investors frequently don’t act rationally. It
seems to be a universal rule of investment that, investors repeatedly become greedy
and put their hope in one new trend that will make them immensely rich; the famous
tulip mania of the 17th century in the Dutch Republic is often quoted as a reference
to a bubble.
 Some investors attempt to counteract irrational exuberance by investing for the
long term. They examine business models and other factors, such as a company’s eco-
nomic moat, and select only companies that meet sufficient quality criteria to withstand
all market fluctuations. However, the integration opportunities of ML algorithms based
on time series data for such specific decision-making scenarios are often limited or
require more effort than usual to be successful. For this reason, many strategies based
on randomness, such as Monte Carlo simulation, are helpful when examining stocks.
SOCIETAL  AND TECHNOLOGICAL  CHANGES  OVER TIME
Some data sources, such as social media sentiments, weren’t available in the more dis-
tant past, and we would hardly be able to collect information on what the masses
thought about Coca-Cola or other stocks in the 1980s at specific times.
 Companies in the past had vastly different environments regarding available tech-
nology, regulations, and taxes. Integrating computers, the internet, and AI has impacted

194 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
how companies operate. Successful ML models from the past must be retrained and
improved to stay competitive.
 Decades ago, only a few companies would have considered writing an environ-
mental, social, and governance (ESG) report to outline that they weren’t purely
profit-oriented. Not being concerned about maximizing profits could have been seen
as a weakness during more competitive periods. Today, analysts and ML models weigh
in on ESG factors, and at some point, ESG performance may impact a company’s
stock price similarly to its earnings results.
NOTE Some analysts consider ESG factors to be political. Companies adjust
their diversification and environmental policies in response to a country’s
governmental trends. Purely profit-oriented investors will also include ESG
ratings in decision-making if share prices are affected by companies’ unethi-
cal behavior.
SEASONALITY  AND ECONOMIC  TRENDS
In chapter 3, we stated that some quarters of the year create different economic out-
puts. For industries such as retail, the Christmas season has a different impact than
the summer holidays. Some companies can face severe problems if a new product
flops near the end of the year, even if the numbers in the preceding months had
been impressive.
 Assuming we create models that predict the stock price annually to bypass season-
ality, we still face economic cycles. A stock price forecasting model trained during a
recession might deliver different outputs than models trained in a bull market. Com-
panies focusing on automated trading, such as Renaissance Technologies (RenTech)
mentioned earlier, have faced challenges due to changing market trends. Models that
had previously produced profits suddenly started to incur losses overnight.
ACCOUNTING  PRACTICES  AND LEADERSHIP  CHANGES
Although we learned in chapter 3 that companies must follow accounting standards,
companies still have some flexibility in presenting numbers within these standards.
Companies regularly reassess their strategies, and new executives may adopt new
approaches to achieve greater success than their predecessors. Those responsible for
achieving the goals will also strive to ensure that their efforts to fulfill this strategy are
reflected in the numbers, thereby pleasing shareholders. These different accounting
strategies are a challenge for ML algorithms.
 If we examine companies that have existed for decades, such as IBM or General
Electric, we also observe that their focus shifts over time. Can we use the past as a ref-
erence if the overall strategy within a company changes? Likely not.
MARKET  BUBBLES
Historically, we know there have been numerous manias and bubbles, in which inves-
tors no longer acted rationally. Let’s look at Cisco as a reference for a company that
existed during the dot-com bubble. At its peak in 2000, the stock price was above $77,
and this price has never been reached again. We need to detect these phases of irrational

195 8.1 From code to machine learning
exuberance and ensure that a model can detect trends that might not be sustainable
in the long run.
8.1.4 Technical challenges
Although we have numerous success stories of a few champions who used ML to achieve
outstanding performance, we also have reference stories of companies that exclude ML
due to technical challenges in forecasting prices. Let’s look at some of them.
VOLATILITY
Figure 8.6 shows the price of an asset over time. At the beginning and end, the asset’s
price is close to where it started. Without knowing what happened in between, we
could also assume that the price of this asset is stable; however, we wouldn’t be aware
that the price has moved significantly.
Of course, we can always investigate volatility by collecting daily returns over time,
conducting statistical analysis, and incorporating this aspect as a decision factor. Still,
stock volatility makes it more challenging for ML algorithms to identify strong assets.
OVERFITTING  AND UNDERFITTING
Chapter 3 highlighted the many ratios that could be explored to assess a company’s
performance. All of these ratios are potential candidates for ML features. Besides the
fundamentals and technical data, such as the stock price, numerous external factors,
including the country’s overall economic situation, social media sentiments, news,
weather, insider trades, and more, can also influence the stock price.
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5PriceATOM-USD
2021-01 2021-04 2021-07 2021-10 2022-01 2022-04 2022-07 2022-10 2023-01
DateClosing Price
Figure 8.6 Price development of Cosmos (ATOM) between 2021 and 2023

196 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
 If we select a minimal number of features, we risk underfitting, which occurs when
a ML algorithm fails to identify strong correlations between the features and the label.
Considering the vast number of possible features, we also risk failing due to the
opposite by overfitting the models if we add too many features. Some statisticians
often speak of the signal and the noise. Features that aren’t interesting—the noise—
frequently prevent us from seeing the factors we would need to see to predict an out-
come, the signal.
EFFORT
If we train and update multiple models regularly, we must find efficient practices to
manage them well. Models need to be versioned, and it must be possible to redeploy
every historical model if necessary. Changes in models also need to be transparent so
that we can better understand how they have evolved in retrospect.
 In addition, companies in various industries and sectors exhibit significant differ-
ences, as illustrated in chapter 3. A model that works for one industry may not be
effective in another. So, we would have to create specific models for separate indus-
tries and sectors, making the process even more complicated, as we need to maintain
many models in parallel.
 Figure 8.7 shows the MLDevOps Cycle. This picture illustrates the entire lifecycle
of model generation, encompassing data exploration and deployment options. We
collect and prepare data, and then build and validate ML models. Once validated, the
model is versioned, packaged, and deployed to a production environment. New results
are continuously collected in this operational setting, enabling us to refine our under-
standing of model performance. New data sources are identified and integrated as the
process evolves, feeding the next model development cycle.
ML
Data
Model
DEV
Extract,
Transform,
LoadValidate
Identify
New
DataPackageOPS
Deploy
Monitor
Figure 8.7 The MLDevOps Cycle, including preparation and deployment

197 8.1 From code to machine learning
In larger organizations, the efforts required to maintain models can become immense,
slowing down overall progress within the company. It’s one task to create models, but
another to maintain them to avoid chaos.
8.1.5 Narrowing the scope
A ML model that accurately forecasts all stock prices would be like the golden goose
from the fairy tale, and the universal money-making formula, of course, doesn’t exist.
Many companies successfully use ML use cases for more isolated scenarios. If you
apply your skills wisely and focus on the right goals, there are plenty of chances to pre-
dict future gains better than others. Let’s look at a narrowed use case.
 A business model describes how a company generates revenue and achieves eco-
nomic success. For example, Netflix and Spotify have subscription-based and adver-
tisement-based revenue models. The goal is to maximize the number of users who pay
a monthly subscription fee.
 We can develop specific ML models to measure success, incorporating generic eco-
nomic data, sentiments, and other data sources to predict industry outcomes. Such a
model can’t eliminate all risks, such as mismanagement or geopolitical changes, but it
can help assess possible results for a market niche.
 M L  i s  p a r t  o f  d i s c r i m i n a t i v e  m o d e l s .  W e  e x p e c t  t h e m  t o  r e t u r n  q u a n t i t a t i v e
results, such as a binary classification (e.g., “yes”, “no”, “up”, or “down”) or a num-
ber based on a regression algorithm, which forecasts the likely future share price of
an asset. Suppose a ML model recommends we sell company shares of a company
that we believe has the brightest future imaginable. The output format will always
be the same; the results won’t contain any creative analysis but will indicate buy,
sell, or hold. Traditional ML won’t explain its reasoning. The adage “Every use case
has its best-suited tool, but not every tool is suitable for every use case” applies. Dis-
criminative ML frameworks can be beneficial for use cases where no creativity is
required. If you, for instance, plan to build a robo trader to automate transactions
to trigger orders based on the data on the market, traditional ML use cases will pro-
vide the value you need. Now, it’s time to investigate a different form of AI that gen-
erates new results, which we could also call creative in some cases, addressing different
use cases.
RenTech and automated trading
If you’re interested in quantitative trading, study RenTech’s history and learn how this
company became one of the most successful hedge fund management firms. One
special lesson, which can’t be fully captured in depth in a book focused on teaching
programmers the basics of investment, is the challenges Jim Simons and his col-
leagues had to overcome to succeed.
It’s easy to imagine yourself looking at a screen and cheering that your model trades
better than the market. But you also must see the periods in which a model that just

198 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
8.2 From machine learning to generative AI
ML has a specific use case. Models trained for forecasting stock prices, as a representa-
tive of discriminative AI, can’t be used in other scenarios. In contrast to the discrimi-
native models we’ve seen, GenAI targets universal applications. It’s self-evident that an
ML model trained for different use cases, such as medical applications, can’t predict
stock prices. However, if we asked a public LLM, such as OpenAI GPT or Google Gem-
ini, any question, whether it’s about finance or other topics, in most cases, we get
results that at least sound right.
 So, what makes GenAI so different? The obvious answer is that, when examining
chat use cases, using an LLM to generate answers is an advanced natural language
processing (NLP) use case, and its purpose, techniques, and applications fundamen-
tally differ from those of a linear regression use case, which aims to predict trends in a
stock price. Traditional NLP applications can be compared with house cats, whereas
LLMs could be seen as big cats. But in that context, comparing GenAI using LLMs
and ML is like comparing cats with mice. Both are mammals; they share a commonal-
ity, just as LLMs and ML are part of analytics, but they are still distinct species.
 Conversely, we still explored the possible limitations of computer-generated mod-
els in a chaotic domain, which gives an excellent idea of what to look for when
researching a different analytical domain. GenAI, although “a different species,” is
another form of computer-generated model, and it makes sense to examine whether
the same limitations apply.
 We won’t go into the details in this book, but here’s two books that describe how
the transformer model and attention algorithms have become game changers: Genera-
tive AI in Action  by Amit Bahree (Manning, 2024; www.manning.com/books/generative -
ai-in-action ) and Introduction to Generative AI  by Numa Dhamani and Maggie Engler
(Manning, 2024; www.manning.com/books/introduction-to-generative-ai ). To sum-
marize the evolution, a paper called “Attention Is All You Need” ( https:/ /mng.bz/
Pw55 ) suggested an improvement when building text-based models. Instead of explor-
ing the relationship between every word in a sentence, the idea is to focus on the rela-
tionship between the essential words in sentences. This led to the transformer model.
This new approach allowed us to collect vast amounts of data and provides the basis
for LLMs, which are trained by millions of parameters.(continued)
made profits the weeks before suddenly makes losses. Everyone around you asks
the same question: Why? And, as can often be the case with ML, you may not have
an immediate answer.

199 8.2 From machine learning to generative AI
8.2.1 Comparing LLMs
Let’s start with an experiment. We’ll ask GPT-4o, Gemini, and Finance Chat about
investment strategies. We’ll provide the following three prompts related to investment
and compare the differences in the answers provided by the LLMs:
What is the current trend in the stock market?
Provide me with three reference examples that Warren Buffett would invest in
based on his strategy that aren’t currently in his portfolio.
Provide me with three reference examples of investments that Peter Lynch
would make based on his strategy that aren’t currently in his portfolio.
This chapter summarizes the results, highlighting that LLMs aren’t infallible. This test
run was executed in June 2024, before the market experienced some losses in August
2024, from which it largely recovered. Note that one challenge using LLMs is nonde-
terminism. Different users may receive different answers depending on the LLM they
use and the parameters they specify.
SUMMARIZING  THE ANSWERS
Although Gemini and GPT also raised concerns, all LLMs painted a positive picture of
the market. They advertised to investors to diversify their portfolios, which is standard
advice most financial advisors give. No LLM provided a strategy that would have pre-
vented us from experiencing the hiccups in August 2024. There are some investment
recommendations, such as using passive investment methods, but this advice is one of
the most common recommendations investment experts give to new investors.
 The answers to specific questions about Warren Buffett’s and Peter Lynch’s invest-
ment strategies are more conclusive. Both are investors who follow a particular
approach. Peter Lynch was a growth investor until he retired, and Warren Buffett is
known for his value investment style. Table 8.1 shows the results.
INTERPRETATION  OF RESULTS
Some magazines, such as The Economist , warned investors about a possible stock mar-
ket overvaluation in July 2024. Although we can acknowledge that LLMs can generally
detect volatility, they aren’t yet capable of providing a conclusive or detailed view of
the stock market, as a reader might expect when reading articles in the Financial
Times , Wall Street Journal , or any other newspaper, making it more sensible to consult a
professional rather than an LLM.Table 8.1 Results of prompts related to stocks
Investor GPT-4o Gemini Finance Chat
Buffett Microsoft, Costco, Visa Costco, Microsoft, Procter & 
Gamble Allegion, Danaher, Coca-Cola
Lynch Etsy, Zoom, Square Trade Desk, Etsy, Shopify Tesla, Allegion, DCP

200 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
 Regarding the investor’s comparison, GPT-4o and Finance Chat returned stocks
already in the Berkshire Hathaway portfolio ( www.cnbc.com/berkshire-hathaway-
portfolio/ ): Visa and Coca-Cola. GPT-4o and Gemini came up with the same picks for
Warren Buffett (Microsoft, Costco) twice, and had one match with Peter Lynch (Etsy).
GPT-4o picked a company, Square, that was renamed in 2021. Additionally, it chose a
company (Zoom) strongly associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Finance Chat
picked a company called Allegion twice.
 These tests highlight the risks associated with seeking investment advice. Did GPT-
4o and Gemini choose the same stock because they use the same data sources? How
old are the data sources? Why did Finance Chat pick an Irish company (Allegion)
twice? On which data were all three models trained?
8.2.2 Complementing ML with GenAI
It’s challenging to compare GenAI with traditional ML as, to some extent, they fulfill
different purposes. ML is more concise, whereas GenAI can be seen as a Swiss army
knife for creative problem-solving tasks. One way they can be used together is by using
GenAI as a research tool for ML models. The idea behind ML is to train a model that
receives data, examines specific parameters, and predicts an outcome based on histor-
ical data. One challenge is selecting the proper parameter to maintain the model.
 GenAI, a tool that provides more generic answers, can help accelerate the research
process to identify suitable features for an ML model. In short, don’t think of old-
school ML or GenAI; instead, consider using both in tandem in your explorations.
8.2.3 Challenges
Based on our small experiment and existing knowledge, we can identify the chal-
l e n g e s  w e  f a c e  w h e n  u s i n g  L L M s  f o r  i n v e s t m e n t  a d v i c e .  S o m e  a r e  c r u c i a l  t o  m a k e
informed investment decisions, determining whether we achieve gains or losses.
Hardly anyone wants to lose money because of some risky speculation that an LLM
might be right.
DATED INFORMATION
Imagine you’re seeking investment advice, and the model was trained on outdated
data. You’ll find a recent article on the internet about potential risks uncovered about
a specific asset. The LLM might not have learned about it yet.
HALLUCINATIONS
Ultimately, an LLM is a model with billions of parameters. The maintainers of LLMs
generate them by training these models on vast amounts of data sources, primarily
from the internet. While LLMs might return astute advice that could help you make
decent returns, they could also return questionable answers.
8.2.4 Final judgement on ML and GenAI
T r a d i t i o n a l  M L  i s  a l s o  r e f e r r e d  t o  a s  d i s c r i m i n a t i v e  A I .  Discriminative  means distin-
guishing or separating from others, whereas generative  aims for creative output. ML

201 8.3 Practical use of GenAI
focuses more on specific use cases to extract results from data, whereas GenAI’s appli-
cations are broader and lead to unexpected outcomes. The approach of both meth-
ods may differ, but the outcome is the same if the scope of an investment analysis is
too broad. Trusting forecasts in a highly volatile environment is a risk. Remember,
past performance isn’t indicative of future results.
 As we’ve demonstrated, both methods offer value within a narrow scope; there-
fore, let’s explore how we can use GenAI in our financial research. We’ll indicate that
GenAI can provide value in economic research when applied correctly.
8.3 Practical use of GenAI
GenAI offers various methods for searching for assets with high returns. In this sec-
tion, we list some of them. Be aware that GenAI is an evolving technology; we con-
tinue to see unexpected innovations that introduce new possibilities for investors.
Continue to explore new ways to optimize results using LLMs. We’ll introduce some
advanced use cases in chapter 9.
8.3.1 Using LLMs as research assistants
LLMs reduce the time required to perform time-intensive tasks, particularly research-
related work that necessitates exploring numerous resources to achieve results.
Instead of asking in general what the best stocks are to invest in, we can ask questions
that require an LLM to look for explicit details. One exemplary detail for a decision-
making scorecard for a purchase decision is the management performance of a com-
pany’s executive board. Using LLMs, we can generate an initial summary of a com-
pany’s leaders more quickly than if we queried each manager on LinkedIn. The same
applies to pending lawsuits, insider trades, business models, or customer segmenta-
tion. What could have taken hours to research by traditional web research, an LLM
can often provide within a few seconds. Let’s dive deeper into two use cases.
SUMMARIZING  DOCUMENTS
Investing requires extensive research and thinking. Many professional investors, such
as Warren Buffett, devote significant time to reading and gathering information about
a company. Many companies publish lengthy documents, and we can obtain tran-
scripts of various calls and presentations. Reading all of them from start to finish takes
a lot of time.
 One specific use case of LLMs is passing these documents to an LLM and asking it
to summarize them, focusing on the topics that are specifically interesting to you. For
example, a 60-page document can be summarized into a one-pager with the most
essential facts.
CODE GENERATION
This book presents a substantial amount of code for analyzing stocks. At the same
time, every interested programmer can get a lot of algorithms themselves from an
LLM. An LLM can generate substantial, meaningful code that makes programming
easier and faster, from collecting data to calculating ratios or using ML.

202 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
HIGH-LEVEL ANALYSES  OF NONFINANCIAL  RISKS
In chapter 7, we highlighted that using algorithms to assess multiple nonfinancial
risks can lead to significant efforts, as the term nonfinancial risk  can encompass a broad
range of factors that aren’t financial and therefore lack a clear definition. We can use
data to predict the impact of pandemics, wars, and natural catastrophes on individual
companies, and we’ll learn that some might be affected by others. However, detailed
assessments can lead to significant efforts. Let’s ask ourselves how accurate our analy-
sis must be. Perhaps for a private investor, a high-level overall evaluation is sufficient,
allowing us to validate the output of LLMs.
 You can submit a prompt such as “Assuming that risks can have a rating from 10
(maximum) to 0 (minimum), I would like to assess the risk of pandemics, global trade
wars, and climate change to each asset in my portfolio. Provide at least one sentence
why. If there is no way to associate the risk, a statement that you don’t have enough
data is also fine.”
 Table 8.2 is a reference result provided by GPT-4o to the author. It was transcribed
to this table; you can offer a similar portfolio analysis with a similar prompt.
Table 8.2 A reference risk assessment provided by GPT-4o (0 minimum, 10 maximum)
Company Pandemic ReasonTrade 
warReasonClimate 
changeReason
Google 2 Digital services 
thrive in pandemics.6 Global ad spend is 
exposed to geopo-
litical frictions.3 Low direct cli-
mate exposure
Pfizer 4 High initial benefit 
from COVID, less 
future upside3 Limited export vul-
nerability2 Low environmen-
tal risk overall
Ali Baba 5 Chinese consump-
tion dropped in early 
pandemics.9 Central figure in 
US-China tech 
decoupling6 Some exposure 
to carbon-inten-
sive logistics
Orsted 1 Renewable energy 
demand steady or 
rising2 Localized wind/
green projects 
limit exposure.9 Renewable 
energy play 
depends on cli-
mate policy.
CCJ 1 Uranium demand 
steady4 Export-oriented but 
essential material6 Positive expo-
sure as nuclear 
gains from cli-
mate urgency
Lyft 8 Transportation 
demand falls in 
lockdowns.3 Mainly domestic 
US service4 Some regulatory 
risk for emissions
MNMD 3 Biotech trials 
delayed during 
pandemics.1 Low global export 
relevance2 No meaningful 
climate exposure

203 8.3 Practical use of GenAI
Professional risk analysts will highlight that these assessments are vague and that orga-
nizations focusing on risk will likely achieve better results that have also been peer-
reviewed. Still, an assessment of an LLM may provide enough information for a pri-
vate investor to review their strategy. In the previous evaluation, we’ve allocated 33
points to the pandemic, 43 to the trade war, and 41 to climate change. Although these
ratings estimate an LLM, investors can discover that they may be exposed to specific
risks and act accordingly. For instance, knowing that one’s portfolio is more exposed
to, let’s say, the risks of a pandemic might lead to more cautious behavior when there
are reports that a new pandemic might come.
8.3.2 Integrating LLMs into code
LLM providers compete in the market to gain more user visibility. Some LLMs are
available in different product versions, with more limited or powerful features.
Even if the latest version of an LLM might be more dominant than others for a
while, providers regularly release new versions with new features, so any dominance
is broken soon.
 Public LLMs, such as OpenAI (GPT), Google (Gemini), or Meta (Llama), allow
prompting through an API, and we can integrate API calls to them into Python code.
We can submit a prompt and receive an answer that we can then further process. We’ll
also demonstrate how models from Hugging Face differ when downloaded to a local
machine for execution.
OPENAI
As programmers, we want to submit a prompt to an engine through an API and
retrieve the results into variables, rather than pasting requests into a chat box. List-
ing 8.8 is a sample code that allows us to do that for OpenAI GPT models. You need
an OpenAI account and an API key to run this source code. The variable system_
content  is a generic parameter of how you want GPT to answer; you can fill out here
that GPT should be concise or instruct the LLM otherwise on how to behave. Using
this simple code, we submit a prompt and evaluate the response that the LLM
returns.
 
 Uber 6 Rides fell and Eats 
rose in pandemic.5 Operates globally, 
exposed to 
trade/friction4 Transition risks 
from electrifica-
tion targets
TSM 3 Demand dropped in 
the first wave but 
rebounded fast.10 Key battleground 
in US-China chip 
conflict 5 Some energy/
water footprint 
issuesTable 8.2 A reference risk assessment provided by GPT-4o (0 minimum, 10 maximum)  (continued)
Company Pandemic ReasonTrade 
warReasonClimate 
changeReason

204 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
from openai import OpenAI
client = OpenAI(
  api_key=api_key
)
completion = client.chat.completions.create(
  model="gpt-4o",
  messages=[
    {"role": "system", "content": system_content},
    {"role": "user", "content": question}
  ]
)
Generally, the latest models yield the best results. However, in some cases, it’s more
effective to use a smaller model that generates less latency and incurs lower costs per
token. We could, therefore, use GPT-4o mini instead of GPT-4o if costs or latency are
essential for us.
 The method for the chat completions has multiple parameters ( https:/ /mng.bz/
rZDj ). As the API is being extended, exploring whether new options are available
makes sense.
 One parameter to try out is the temperature  parameter, which defines how much
less likely tokens the answer should include. The higher the temperature, the more
random the output. We can use temperature as a measure of risk and stick to 0 if we’re
risk-averse and don’t want GPT to speculate.
 Having an interface with OpenAI means we can now use Jupyter Notebooks to ask
a wide range of questions. However, as with human advisors, it often helps to seek
advice from different experts and compare their recommendations. Therefore, let’s
look at integrating Google Gemini into Python code.
GEMINI
Integrating basic Gemini API calls into Python code is relatively easier than integrat-
ing with GPT. The snippet in listing 8.9 shows how to prompt using Gemini. Again,
we can pick different model versions; we only need to send a question and evaluate
the results.
model = genai.GenerativeModel('gemini-1.5-pro-latest')
response = model.generate_content("Perform Porter 5 Forces Framework "
.                                 "analysis on NVIDIA")
print(response.candidates[0].content.parts[0])
In the code sample, we used gemini-1.5-pro-latest . Ranked by their complexity,
there are also the Ultra, Pro, Flash, and Nano models. Nano models are designed toListing 8.8 Submit a prompt via the OpenAI API
Listing 8.9 Submit a prompt via the Gemini API

205 8.3 Practical use of GenAI
be executed in environments with low computing power, such as mobile devices.
When writing this book, only a 1.5 version of Pro and Flash is available, making the
Pro model the strongest model until a new ultra version is released.
 We can also add configuration options. In listing 8.10, we limit the token of our
response and add a configuration option for temperature that defines how creative
the LLM can be.
response = model_flash.generate_content(f"Perform Porter 5 Forces"
.                                        "Framework analysis on NVIDIA",
                                        generation_config = 
genai.GenerationConfig(
                                        max_output_tokens=max_token,
                                        temperature=temperature,
                                    ))
Integrating GPT and Gemini is easy. We can explore whether integrating other LLMs
is comparable and easy. Let’s look at two more models before we explore open source
models as alternatives.
OTHER LLM S
Listing 8.11 shows the API for Claude, which hosts a series of LLMs provided by
Anthropic. In this snippet, the parameters max_tokens  and temperature  have already
been integrated. A Python programmer can incorporate and run the code into any
Python script, provided they also have a valid API Key. Observe that the parameters
are similar to those of other APIs.
client = anthropic.Anthropic(api_key=key)
message = client.messages.create(
      model="claude-3-opus-20240229",
      max_tokens=1000,
      temperature=0,
      system="You are Claude, an AI assistant.",
      messages=[
          {"role": "user", "content": question}
      ]
 print("Claude's response:", answer.content)
As shown in listing 8.12, the integration of Mistral, another LLM created by a French
company, demonstrates that integrating API calls is straightforward. It seems trivial to
integrate the code. There might be some minor differences in how the methods are
named, but essentially, for all LLMs, it’s all about selecting a model, configuring some
parameters, and sending a query with a question to the LLM
 .Listing 8.10 Submitting prompts via Gemini with parameters
Listing 8.11 Submitting prompts via the Anthropic API

206 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
model = "mistral-large-latest"
client = Mistral(api_key=api_key)
chat_response = client.chat.complete(
  model = model,
  messages = [
    {
      "role": "user",
      "content": question,
    },
  ]
)
print(chat_response.choices[0].message.content)
But all of these LLMs, even if we just provided simple snippets, have one thing in com-
mon: a developer needs to get an API key to work with it. The companies behind
these LLMs use their models to generate revenue. This means some of these LLMs are
only accessible if the entity that provides the API key pays a subscription fee.
 Additionally, all of these LLMs are hosted within the company’s infrastructure.
Suppose someone aims to create a fintech start-up that develops sophisticated invest-
ment strategies. In that case, the programmers might not like the idea that a separate
company might investigate requests on their LLMs. They would prefer to host their
LLMs in-house.
 We’ve seen that all of these providers have their API. Programmers will want one
API and use models as parameters instead. In chapter 9, we’ll explore the use of Lang-
Chain, which provides this feature to us.
FINANCE  CHAT
After demonstrating how to integrate proprietary LLMs into code, we’ll now explore
how to incorporate open source LLMs trained on finance-related use cases. Hugging
Face has become the go-to platform for hosting open source LLMs.
NOTE For engineers who have experienced the late 1990s and the battle
between open source and closed source products, the current discussion on
open source and AI often feels like a continuation of the past. Some names
have changed. It’s no longer Windows versus Linux or Bill Gates versus Linus
Torvalds. The battle is between commercial products and Hugging Face, or
Sam Altman and a group of engineers who wanted to remove him when his
authority within OpenAI was questioned.
Open source LLMs face the same opportunities and challenges as open source soft-
ware systems. While they might have less revenue than companies that license soft-
ware, they often have the support of the academic world. Advocates of open source
also claim that their ethical approach is favorable. The source code and the architec-
ture are publicly accessible, and providers of open source LLMs offer more insights
into the training process.Listing 8.12 Submitting prompts via Mistral API

207 8.3 Practical use of GenAI
From a programmer’s point of view, the most significant difference in using open
source models is that we, in the standard case, load a model onto our infrastructure
and execute inference there instead of calling an LLM hosted on a remote server. In
listing 8.13, we use the AdaptLLM/finance-chat  model, which is available on Hugging
Face ( https:/ /huggingface.co/AdaptLLM/finance-chat ). Running the source code
given here will trigger the model download onto the computer if it’s not already pres-
ent and then execute inference on the model locally. If you try out this code, be aware
that it might take some time to download the model when you call this code for the
first time.
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM
def ask_huggingface(model_name, query):
    model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_name)
    tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_name)
    
    our_system_prompt = """\nYou are a helpful, respectful and honest 
assistant. Always answer as helpfully as possible, while being safe.  Your 
answers should not include any harmful, unethical, racist, sexist, toxic, 
dangerous, or illegal content. Please ensure that your responses are 
socially unbiased and positive in nature.\n\nIf a question does not make 
any sense, or is not factually coherent, explain why instead of answering 
something not correct. If you don't know the answer to a question, please 
don't share false information.\n"""
    prompt = f"<s>[INST] <<SYS>>{our_system_prompt}<</SYS>>"
             f"\n\n{query} [/INST]"
    inputs = tokenizer(prompt, return_tensors="pt", 
                       add_special_tokens=False).input_ids.to(model.device)
    outputs = model.generate(input_ids=inputs, max_length=4096)[0]
    
    answer_start = int(inputs.shape[-1])
    pred = tokenizer.decode(outputs[answer_start:], skip_special_tokens=True)
    return pred  Finance-related LLMs
Some LLMs are explicitly trained for specific domains. Bloomberg GPT is a known ref-
erence for an LLM trained with finance data. As Bloomberg GPT is a commercial LLM,
it’s not included in this investigation.
Another option to enhance financial knowledge in data is fine-tuning pretrained mod-
els using financial data. For example, a ML engineer could collect transcripts of earn-
ings calls, where executives discuss a company’s financial results and train existing
LLMs with them. As a result, the model would keep what it already knows and add
new knowledge. We’ll explore that in chapter 9.
Listing 8.13 Executing prompt with open source models

208 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
question = "What is the current trend in the stock market?"
model = "AdaptLLM/finance-chat"
response = ask_huggingface(model,  question)
Using Hugging Face, we can avoid the cost of commercial LLMs. But there is a down-
side to this. If we run a model locally, we first need the necessary hardware to support
it. This includes the required disk space and the processors to execute the model.
 Inference may take some time, depending on the local machine’s hardware.
Expect a few minutes, depending on the number of GPUs you provide to the model.
Remember that you may need to allocate time to install additional Python libraries.
8.4 Prompt engineering
Many YouTube videos teach interested followers how to optimize prompts. What
sounds like a complex discipline, especially the term engineering , may make it sound
sophisticated. Still, it has a simple problem statement: don’t just ponder what to ask,
but also how. The better you can explain what you want and the more context you can
provide, the better answers you’ll get. Nobody needs an engineering degree to apply
prompt engineering, but it’s perhaps one of the biggest low-hanging fruits for achiev-
ing better results using AI. Let’s kick off prompts by defining an investor’s profile.
8.4.1 An investor’s profile
Imagine a random person approaches a human financial advisor with a generic ques-
tion, such as “Please provide me with a good portfolio.” A professional investment
expert wouldn’t recommend anything without knowing more about their client.
Using well-prepared questions, good advisors guide their clients to share more about
their risk tolerance or investment goals.
 Like a human financial advisor, an LLM will provide more sophisticated answers if
given more context. The following question is a first improvement of the previous ref-
erence question: 
I am a risk-averse investor who wants to invest in stocks. I currently have $100,000
available for investment. My goal is to maximize my passive income. I want to invest
exclusively in companies in the Information Technology sector. Can you provide me
with a reference portfolio with maximized returns and minimized risks?
Once the input is sent to an LLM, it will be tokenized. The LLM will identify specific
tokens as keywords. In our example, these terms will include risk-averse  investor , stocks ,
the information technology sector , maximizing returns , and minimizing risks . The more we
integrate domain-specific language, the better answers we might receive, as the high-
quality sources of an LLM upon which it was trained were provided by domain experts
who used their domain-specific language.
TIP Reading the investment sections of newspapers, such as The Financial
Times  or The Wall Street Journal , and learning the meaning of specific terms can

209 8.4 Prompt engineering
be a simple yet powerful way to improve query results. The next time, don’t
wonder why the stock market went down or up; ask why it “plummeted” or
“soared.”
If you start investing, you’ll have many research questions about companies or invest-
ment opportunities. Likely, you don’t want to repeat yourself by adding all the context
to each question you have.
 A good human advisor will collect notes about you. However, as time passes, they
may forget the details. One day, they become excited about a fantastic high-growth
start-up, only to realize too late that this opportunity doesn’t align with a client’s risk
profile. Another time, they suggest an international exchange-traded fund (ETF), for-
getting it triggers withholding tax issues based on the client’s residency. Mistakes like
these can cost you money.
 This is where LLMs have a clear edge: they don’t forget. Once you provide a con-
text, it remains consistent across all interactions—unless you explicitly remove or
modify it. Unlike human advisors, who might overlook details, an AI will continuously
apply your parameters, ensuring that every recommendation strictly adheres to your
preferences.
 Establishing context is the first and most crucial step in using AI for financial
guidance. This context defines the rules your AI assistant will follow when analyzing
investments. Let’s examine some parameters and explore how we can adjust our
conversation. The following can be viewed as a template, combined into a large
chunk of text, and provided to an LLM as general knowledge about you.
GOALS
Provide goals that are as precise as possible. What are you in for? Most likely, it’s not
just because a friend told you to explore stocks. Do you aim to become a brilliant out-
lier in the investment world—the one person who is smarter than everyone else and
who will beat the market? Or, do you have a more modest goal to grow patiently and
earn enough money to live off a reasonable passive income each year?
 Many financial advisors argue that you should quantify your goals. How much
money do you aim for? Do you have a number in your head? This brings us to our
next question: What are you willing to risk to fulfill your goals?
RISK PREFERENCE
Imagine you’ve made a risky deal. If all goes well, you might be up 30%. If all goes
bad, you might lose a lot of money. Some people go to bed and sleep like babies. Oth-
ers toss and turn, worrying about possible losses.
 You don’t gain anything by claiming to be bolder than you are. After all, many
investors in the past were successful because they were cautious.
 Knowing your risk preference requires a lot of self-awareness. The more you
understand yourself, the more precise you can be in your persona.

210 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
EXPERIENCE
Warren Buffett mentioned one golden rule: invest only in what you understand—add-
ing details about what you know can be low-hanging fruit in your investment portfolio.
Sentences such as “I am a programmer, and I work in the financial services industry”
can help. You can even mention your former and current employers or clients with
whom you have a strong relationship.
 Additionally, specify which assets you have experience with. You can also exclude
certain assets if you prefer. Cryptocurrency is a good example of a polarizing asset. If
you want or don’t want crypto in your portfolio, mention it.
TAX CONSIDERATIONS
If you tell an LLM your citizenship and residency, it can provide advice on details that
tax consultants typically charge for. Don’t hesitate to add a sentence like this: “I am a
citizen of Country X, and my tax residency is in Country Y, so I need a portfolio that
minimizes tax-related expenses.” Remember that LLMs can hallucinate, and cross-
checking tax advice from an LLM with a human advisor is always a good idea.
ETHICAL  OR PERSONAL  PREFERENCES
Some investors keep their religious, ethical, and political views out of investing. For
others, it might be one of the most critical aspects in their strategy. Would you feel
uncomfortable investing in companies that don’t align with your values? No matter
what you care for—climate change, politics, abortion laws, animal rights, or some-
thing else—mention it; after all, it’s your money.
 You can also engineer your prompts to adjust the style of the answer. Some prefer a
detailed explanation, while others appreciate a concise yet direct response. Let’s craft
a reference persona:
“I have a computer science background. I have 
worked on various digital transformation projects 
for multiple companies. I understand well how AI 
can change companies' businesses. I am looking 
for companies' stocks that might be transformed 
through AI but have not yet been overrun by 
investors.                                           
I aim to achieve financial independence within the 
next five years. I have approximately 500,000 USD 
available for investment. I want to be able to 
calculate the money I make passively, considering 
the average yield of my assets (interest, staking 
rewards, and dividends).                             
I mainly hold stocks and ETFs. I also have bonds 
and crypto. I want to keep some amount in index 
funds.                                             
I am interested in the future of autonomous 
driving and the monetization of climate change Background
Experience

211 8.4 Prompt engineering
mitigation. I also believe in the increasing demand 
for reliable, nonvolatile energy sources, such as 
nuclear energy, driven by the growing need for 
sustainable energy solutions. I am also open to 
alternative sources of energy, including atomic 
energy.                                            
I use Interactive Broker and Alpaca as brokers. 
I use cold wallets to store cryptocurrency.        
I have uploaded a text file with all the stocks 
I hold. It is called stocks.txt and shall be 
included in the research if needed.                
I can take risks if decisions have been thoroughly 
researched. If the valuation of the asset is 
temporarily lower, I have no problem as long as 
I see long-term potential. I am okay with shorting 
some positions, but I prefer long-term quality 
investing. I do not do day trading.                    
I want to diversify. Diversification also includes 
assets worldwide, as I see political risks in the US. 
Otherwise, I am fine with holding most assets in the 
US market.                                             
I am a US American citizen. My tax residency is in 
the UK. I want to minimize the taxes I have to pay.  
I do not like to invest in the tobacco industry 
and companies that ignore animal rights.  
8.4.2 Using prompts to find companies to invest in
Growth investors often seek small-cap companies with a high probability of experienc-
ing a substantial revenue increase over the years. So, can we find these companies
using prompts to an LLM? We need to define in detail what we’re looking for. Let’s do
this with a reference example. Netflix’s business model is quite simple, as shown in
Figure 8.8: the more viewers subscribe to Netflix monthly, the more earnings the com-
pany will make. If we predict that the revenues from subscriptions will exceed their
expenses, Netflix will be profitable. If these profits continue to increase, the share
price will likely rise.
 Predicting Netflix’s costs will likely be challenging, as it requires a deep under-
standing of internal filming projects and licensing negotiations, to which we don’t
have access (unless we work for Netflix). However, we can estimate subscriber growth
using LLMs.
 What can influence subscriber numbers? We must determine what attracts custom-
ers to Netflix and keeps them engaged. For instance, customers sometimes feel locked
in. Many shows in the program are on a customer’s to-do list, or the kids in the family
account become so accustomed to this service that a parent can’t simply cancel theExperience
Risk
Taxes
Ethics

212 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
subscription without risking a family crisis. And often, because you get a report on
what your kid watches, some parents don’t want to miss unique features to monitor
their kids’ TV habits. Such a business with a constant growth scenario and a vendor
lock, or economic moat to use a term more frequently used among investments,
sounds like a paradise for investors. Examining the development of stock prices, par-
ticularly after the transition from mailing DVDs to streaming services, is compelling.
Python or chatbots
Some users experimenting with LLM chatbots may notice they are invaluable when
investigating assets. Some chatbots offer additional research options after users
submit prompts. It’s fair to ask if we still need Python to get results. Chapter 9 will
provide more details on this topic. For now, let’s sum up what standalone chatbots
don’t resolve.
In most cases, the chatbot provider won’t provide Retrieval-Augmented Generations
(RAGs) with vectorized data specific to finance use cases. Additionally, as LLMs may
overlook data from smaller and less well-known companies, they may occasionally
miss crucial details. Lastly, regardless of which provider you choose, the results will
always be stored on the provider’s side, and you’ll face challenges in keeping track
of resources across different platforms.
Therefore, using chatbots can help us answer questions. If we want to work with more
LLMs and add specific additional data, though, we might still need to use some code
to accomplish this. In chapter 9, we’ll demonstrate how to use AI agents.
Costs Revenues
Subscription payments
Movie production costsLicensing costs
Figure 8.8 A highly simplified model reduced to the most central figures that Netflix is 
profitable if revenues from paying subscribers exceed production and licensing costs. 
While, of course, many more numbers exist that influence accounting sheets, such 
illustrations help us to extract these numbers that can be most decisive about a specific 
company’s long-term success.

213 Summary
Although the business model may be compelling, Netflix may no longer be in a signif-
icant growth phase. But what if we described what made Netflix successful in a prompt
and see if we could find a similar company?
 The more context and details we provide about how we want an LLM to answer,
the more specific responses we can get. Let’s review a checklist to see if our prompt
can be improved.
Are we specific enough?  We can define what we want in detail. We can also ask
about register in answers (from more formal to less formal). Have we listed the
details that matter to us?
Do we express ourselves succinctly?  Imprecise and unnecessarily long phrases might
reduce efficiency.
Can we supply examples in the input?  One way to improve answers is by providing
examples of what we seek. We might look for companies like ones we know well
and where we believe they will be successful.
L e t ’ s  f o r m u l a t e  a  p r o m p t  t o  f i n d  c o m p a n i e s  l i k e  N e t f l i x .  W e  c a n  i n v o k e  d i f f e r e n t
LLMs to compare results:
I want to find companies with a similar outlook to Netflix’s in the early years. I want
to buy low and sell at a high price in some years. These companies will be able to
scale globally, offer a B2C subscription model, and possess a strong economic moat.
These companies will have room to grow and already be listed on the stock exchange.
Please give me three examples and the reasons why you chose them.
ChatGPT returned Duolingo and Bumble as results, which some investors on Seeking
Alpha saw as a risky investment. Be aware that an LLM’s recommendations are just an
entry point for further research. Investing in them without your due diligence is risky.
You must determine whether the answers provided by the LLMs are sensible. 
Summary
We can integrate ML algorithms as code snippets into web notebooks to aid us
in financial research, such as forecasting stock price developments, including
uptrends.
Unsupervised learning may help us identify outliers, which, in the investment
scenario, could be companies that perform differently from the rest and pres-
ent an investment opportunity.
We can use unsupervised learning to find potential labels for supervised learn-
ing algorithms.
Supervised learning can help us forecast a company’s future success by analyz-
ing its historical data.
Successfully applying supervised learning algorithms can require a high level of
technical expertise, encompassing everything from collecting data from multi-
ple sources to processing algorithms at scale.

214 CHAPTER  8AI for financial research
As the market is affected by many factors (fundamental data, technical data, or
other data unrelated to a specific company), most models risk being either
overfitted or underfitted.
The efficient market theory suggests that for most assets, the market price accu-
rately reflects the asset’s intrinsic value.
The random market theory and the allegory of Mr. Market suggest that a mar-
ket is unpredictable. This makes ML models challenging.
Technological and social changes affect investment strategies. For example, ESG
regulations are more important to investors today than they were in the past.
Seasonal and economic trends impact the performance of stocks and must be
considered in ML models.
Different accounting practices within companies make it more difficult to com-
pare companies.
To integrate ML, we must invest considerable effort in identifying specific
industry patterns and retraining models. Only a fraction of hedge funds run
largely successful ML use cases.
LLMs are game-changers in natural language processing (NLP). They employ
a new paradigm called the attention mechanism, which focuses solely on the
relationship between keywords. This makes it possible to create models
trained on billions of parameters and serve as chatbots for users to address
generic topics.
LLMs can be trained to answer specific questions related to topics, including
finance and investment.
LLMs are also excellent for providing an overview of how specific nonfinancial
risks can impact individual companies. Just be aware that you might have to
review the output due to possible hallucinations.
Users can choose from various LLMs, and an API for sending queries to an
LLM is easy to integrate into Python code. In most cases, all users require an
API key to authenticate against the provider and obtain authorization to pro-
cess LLM inference on the LLM provider’s infrastructure.
Many LLMs come in versions that differ in complexity. Some may require a paid
subscription, while others are designed for environments with fewer computing
resources, such as mobile phones.
We can classify LLMs as open source or proprietary. We can download models
of open source LLMs to a compute node or local workstation to run the infer-
ence there. Proprietary LLMs are executed on the provider’s infrastructure.
AI ethics professionals are concerned about proprietary LLMs, as providers
could misuse the information provided to them through users’ questions. Addi-
tionally, the transparency of how these providers collect information is a signifi-
cant ethical concern.

215 Summary
Whether an LLM is open source or proprietary, it can provide us with invest-
ment ideas. Betting on LLM investment advice without further investigation is
highly speculative.
LLMs are great for tasks that require them to act like research assistants. When
investors require less time for research, they can devote more attention to deci-
sion-making processes.
The code generation capabilities of LLMs enable programmers to write more
efficient code and analyze investments in various scenarios using programming
languages such as Python.
Although we can use LLMs to generate investment ideas, their core asset is
helping us with due diligence on existing ideas, specifically when we need to
find details on possible investments to create a personal scorecard for informed
purchase decisions.
Although LLMs help us speed up finance research tasks, they occasionally make
mistakes and provide false information, often called hallucinations.
The question isn’t whether to use discriminative AI (traditional ML) or GenAI;
it’s rather how to pragmatically use what’s there for specific scenarios and com-
bine the possibilities of each technology.
Prompt engineering is a discipline that enhances the output of LLMs by
enabling users to ask more effective questions. It provides ways to pass more
details, reference examples, and additional context for a request to an LLM.
Prompt engineering can’t replace common wisdom, as it depends on us to clar-
ify what we want to know to avoid generic questions in an LLM.
Creating an investor profile that includes information such as goals, risk toler-
ance, and tax residency can help an LLM provide more refined answers.
Be as specific as possible and give as much context as possible when submitting
prompts. It helps to provide reference examples.

216AI agents
Chapter 8 concluded that large language models (LLMs) are powerful research
assistants who can significantly streamline asset analysis. We learned the fundamen-
tals, including the distinction between discriminative and generative AI (GenAI),
as well as how to trigger LLM prompts effectively.
 Chapter 9 focuses first on the advanced application of LLMs without frame-
works to build AI agents. We’ll first show scenarios for integrating LLM into work-
flows. We’ll create a prompt repository and design a first workflow to bring more
structure to AI-augmented research. Additionally, we’ll demonstrate how to export
our findings to Notion, a modern note-taking application that helps organize and
structure research efficiently.
 In the second part of this chapter, we’ll integrate frameworks to build AI agents.
We’ll show how to use them and how much work can be simplified. We’ll introduceThis chapter covers
Building AI agents for structured research
Using LangChain to build AI agents
Reusing strong prompts for comparable research
Exporting the results of your study to Notion

217 9.1 Requirements
what is possible in a no-code framework using the platform n8n. Lastly, we’ll focus on
LangChain, which allows us to code logic in Python. Let’s get started.
9.1 Requirements
In chapter 8, we used one-shot prompting to query LLMs. In simplified terms, this is
submitting a single prompt to an LLM for a single response. Now, imagine that you
get access to a human expert, and you’re allowed to ask only one question. This sce-
nario is common; consider a press conference where a politician responds to the
press’s inquiries. You might not get the desired answers if your question is poorly for-
mulated. Compare a single-question, single-answer scenario to the next stage of com-
munication. Imagine being able to interview that expert and engage in a dialogue.
Based on past answers, you can ask more directed questions.
9.1.1 Successful communication
We can create parallels to AI. In addition to asking one-shot questions for basic sce-
narios, we can develop a refined strategy for more complex settings. Before we
delve into the details, let’s consider what is required for successful communication
in this analogy.
MEMORY
One difference between conversing with AI and human interaction is the reflection of
past communication. If Rajesh and Peter discuss a complex topic and gain new
insights from that discussion, both can use what they have learned in upcoming talks.
At the current stage of development, LLMs don’t gain additional insights from inter-
action with users.
NOTE In the background, the developers of LLMs will undoubtedly analyze
conversations between LLMs and users to use the insights gained in build-
ing new models. However, this isn’t the same as humans learning from sin-
gle discussions.
One practical approach is to use Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), which
enhances LLMs by incorporating relevant external context into their input. In other
words, we create additional memory for an LLM by adding specific information that it
can use when crafting answers.
LANGUAGE  SKILLS
Imagine being locked in the Vatican Library with books that have been kept secret for
centuries. These books may contain fascinating historical insights. You’re the first lay-
person to study them, but there’s one catch: they are all written in ancient languages
that you don’t understand. We may need assistance accessing these sources, such as
translation apps or expert scholars.
 LLMs are trained on massive amounts of data. Data that was out of scope during
training is inaccessible to an LLM in the same way that we would never learn to speak
a language such as Latin. In both scenarios, the LLM and the human could learn new

218 CHAPTER  9AI agents
capabilities, but training new LLM models and learning Latin takes time. As we can
use external help, the same thing applies to LLMs. One way to provide LLMs with
access to information unavailable during training is to include this information
during prompting.
 We already mentioned that we can provide access to databases to address the chal-
lenge of integrating supplemental data and ensure that LLMs get access to other
sources. In addition to the obvious candidate of a plain web search as an external data
source, we can also incorporate APIs from various data providers, allowing an AI agent
to retrieve mailbox content or chat history from messengers. We can task AI agents
with parsing these sources, commonly by using API calls that include access tokens,
and providing this information to LLMs.
STRATEGY
Imagine gathering many brilliant minds in one room to solve a single complex prob-
lem. Sometimes, these high-octane brains speculate about great ideas without strategy
or moderation, but fail to deliver a tangible solution. Every coordinated moderate
team with a goal will likely outperform a rudderless team of geniuses.
 When many creative individuals are involved, we often need a leader who can
effectively channel their collective creativity and inspire them to work together. Jim
Simons created one of the most successful investment funds. What people admire
about him is that he was able to assemble a team of brilliant minds recruited from Ivy
League universities. Everyone reading books about him will understand that coordi-
nating the geniuses working with him often seemed more difficult than coming up
with the math to harvest significant returns. However, once his sharp thinkers were
aligned, the funds created by Renaissance Technologies outperformed the market.
 Anyone with experience with academic structures will also understand that every
scientific journal will downgrade papers without a peer review. Even the brightest sci-
entists need feedback, and the challenge is often not coming up with an idea but
working out the nitty-gritty details in a paper.
 What works for humans is also valid for AI. We can employ multiple specialized
LLMs and isolate them for specific tasks. One LLM generates an analysis, and the sec-
ond performs a peer review. We can define all the logic so that AI works like an
orchestra, where every LLM plays its part to achieve a unified result.
9.1.2 Agentic design patterns
Using agentic design patterns is an approach to structuring AI research. Deep-
Learning.AI ( https:/ /mng.bz/V9Qx ) introduced four patterns, which we’ll explore
in detail:
Reflection
Tool use
Planning
Multi-agent collaboration

219 9.1 Requirements
REFLECTION
The reflection pattern enables agents to iteratively improve their performance by ana-
lyzing past actions and adjusting their strategies based on the feedback received. This
pattern encourages self-evaluation: after each task, the agent collects outcome data
and measures performance against predefined goals or metrics. Through repeated
feedback loops, the agent identifies inefficiencies, uncovers patterns, and refines its
decision-making over time.
 Consider a trading bot as an example. Throughout the trading day, it follows
predefined strategies to execute trades. At market close, the bot aggregates key per-
formance indicators—such as profitability, risk exposure, and execution accuracy—
and evaluates which strategies underperformed or missed critical signals. Based on
these insights, it revises its approach for the next trading session. It may tighten risk
thresholds, deprioritize low-yield strategies, or fine-tune execution timing. This
continuous cycle of action, evaluation, and adaptation lies at the heart of the reflec-
tion pattern.
TOOL USE
The tool use pattern empowers agents by integrating external tools, libraries, or APIs
to expand their functional range. Rather than relying solely on internal logic, agents
can delegate specific tasks to specialized systems, such as data retrieval, transforma-
tion, or advanced computations.
 This pattern mirrors how humans use calculators or web services to solve domain-
specific problems efficiently. An AI agent may call a stock price API to retrieve real-
time data or invoke a sentiment analysis tool to interpret market news. When needed,
the agent autonomously identifies which tool to activate, orchestrates the calls, and
integrates the results into its broader decision-making process.
 By outsourcing complex subtasks to purpose-built tools, agents remain lightweight
and modular, enabling them to tackle diverse challenges without reinventing the
wheel. Let’s explore how to coordinate these subtasks.
PLANNING
The planning pattern enables agents to construct and execute multistep strategies to
accomplish complex goals. It introduces dynamic adaptability by allowing agents to
generate workflows in real time based on current objectives, available resources, and
operational constraints.
 In this approach, the agent begins by defining the end goal. It then evaluates the
current environment, identifying constraints, dependencies, and tools. If a preferred
resource is unavailable, the agent seeks alternatives. Based on this assessment, it con-
structs a sequence of actions that takes dependencies into account and executes the
plan step-by-step, continuously monitoring outcomes.
 Consider an AI-driven stock advisory system that evaluates hundreds of compa-
nies daily. To identify promising investments, it dynamically builds a research work-
flow that gathers financial data, scans news articles, processes sentiment data, and

220 CHAPTER  9AI agents
ranks opportunities. If a company’s profile changes due to a significant earnings
surprise, the agent adapts its plan, reprioritizing the analysis and sending timely
alerts.
 The planning pattern emphasizes structure with flexibility, turning reactive agents
into proactive strategists. Let’s see how multiple agents can coordinate work.
MULTI-AGENT  PATTERN
The multi-agent pattern coordinates multiple specialized agents to solve complex
tasks collaboratively. This design emphasizes parallelism, specialization, and delegated
reasoning, where each agent contributes a unique perspective or capability, thereby
enhancing overall system performance. An orchestrator or moderator coordinates the
overall process, ensuring that agents operate in sync and that their outputs are inte-
grated effectively.
 Imagine a stock buy decision modeled as a deliberative process, similar to a court-
room. One agent is the optimist, advocating for the purchase by analyzing growth
potential, profitability, and momentum. A second agent acts as the skeptic, focusing
on downside risks, macroeconomic headwinds, or signs of overvaluation. A third neu-
tral agent acts as the adjudicator. It reviews the arguments from both sides, weighs
their merit, and synthesizes a final investment recommendation. This pattern mirrors
expert panels in human decision-making, promoting robustness through diverse per-
spectives and modular task handling.
A REFERENCE  WORKFLOW
To illustrate everything we learned so far in one reference case for AI agents, let’s cre-
ate a reference case for investment analysis. Such a workflow is shown in figure 9.1.
 In the first stage, a workflow needs to be triggered. Let’s consider some possibilities:
Scheduled event —Every Monday morning, a time-based job scheduler triggers a
prompt submission querying about events from the last week that could have
affected the positions of the user’s investment portfolio.
User query —A user would like to reassess the risks of his portfolio and submits a
prompt to identify possible assets that would be more affected by a political cri-
sis than others. We can feed AI agents from common messaging apps. You can
therefore prompt by typing into WhatsApp, Signal, Telegram, or whatever mes-
senger you prefer.
Alert —A predefined alert triggers a workflow when the market moves vigorously
in a direction, prompting specific questions about market activity and its poten-
tial effect on the user’s portfolio.
An orchestrator starts with a retrieval process. In figure 9.1 we show one workflow.
Based on the query, the agent is, of course, not limited to one workflow alone. The
first step is the retrieval of information. AI engineers train each LLM model version
with data up to a specific moment in time. Once they release the model, they start work-
ing on new models, but likely won’t touch existing models anymore. RAG provides

221 9.1 Requirements
additional data to LLMs, bridging the gap between the model’s release and the
prompt’s submission. For this use case, we defined three categories:
RAG databases —Additional jobs collect data from different sources and provide
this data in a vector database, which allows a workflow to supply this additional
data to the generation workflow with LLMs. We need to be aware that we likely
have to manage additional components that will require some maintenance.
Data ingestion jobs will collect data from different sources to put them into a
RAG database.
Web searches —AI agents commonly provide a standardized interface to search
engines so that they can use the content provided from search engines for the
generation of responses.
Model context protocols (MCPs) —An MCP is a new interface that allows AI agents
to connect to data sources and collect data from data sources in a standardized
format. We can see them as APIs designed explicitly for LLMs. If we need to get,
for instance, the latest share price of a stock for a response, an LLM can query
this information while it generates an answer. One significant advantage overUser
Event
(scheduled/alert)
External data sourcesData IngestOrchestrator
Web SearchRetrieval Generation Review
MailLLM LLM
RAG
DBMCP
Data
ProviderLLM
DocDBMessenger
Output AI agentLLMs
Input
Additional data sources
Figure 9.1 A reference workflow for an AI agent

222 CHAPTER  9AI agents
RAG databases is that the more MCPs are available to us, the less we need to
maintain jobs that aggregate the data for ourselves.
Once we have the data retrieved, we need to start with the generation of responses.
We can consider using multiple LLMs to generate answers. Here, we have the follow-
ing options:
We can provide different LLMs with the same prompts.  As different LLMs have been
trained in different ways and with different data, we can ask LLMs the same
prompts to find out if LLMs come back with different insights.
We can provide different LLMs with different prompts.  We can ask each LLM a spe-
cific question. In investment analysis, one LLM can look for bullish scenarios,
and the other one for bearish ones.
We can, of course, mix approaches.  The more we prompt, the more results we get.
One reason to reduce the number of prompts is the cost-effectiveness, as each
generation of results incurs a cost.
The standard “RAG only approach” is to augment the sources and collect results with
one LLM. However, with multiple LLMs, we can also employ an additional step to
review all results generated by multiple LLMs in another stage with a separate LLM.
Lastly, we need to output the results. We can store all results in a database, such as
Notion, as we’ve shown in chapter 8, or any other channel we like to use.
 We can map all stages to agentic design patterns and reflect on the results we gen-
erated. We use various tools to collect additional data for LLMs, plan our execution,
and adjust workflows as needed, employing different LLMs.
9.2 Agentic workflows without frameworks
Let’s show how we can facilitate agentic workflows without specialized frameworks. We
use a data science notebook for ad hoc research. We aim to automate and approach
our research in a more structured manner. Let’s focus on three things to make our
work more reusable:
Create a repository of reusable prompts.
Connect to different LLMs.
Export results.
One goal is to keep everything as simple as possible. Each chapter features full-func-
tioning code that is downloadable from the publisher’s website. You’ll also find the
code snippets for calling LLMs outlined in chapter 8 of the notebook, which is refer-
enced in chapter 9. Let’s get started.
9.2.1 Prompt repository
By continually analyzing companies, we can develop reusable prompts that can be
applied to multiple scenarios. For example, we can ask an LLM about Apple’s perfor-
mance parameters. We can reuse that prompt for Alphabet or Amazon as well. In

223 9.2 Agentic workflows without frameworks
chapter 8, we learned how to optimize prompts. We can update and refine existing
prompts, mapping them to various scenarios.
 We can also store prompts in a database to reuse them. Let’s explore the simplest
possible database structure:
ID—The ID identifies our prompt. Examples of IDs could be porter_5_forces_
framework or swot_analysis. The IDs tell us what the prompt is about.
Prompt —The prompt contains the text that is precise enough to elicit the
expected answer from the LLM. Take your time to refine the questions, and
improve them if the LLMs don’t provide the answers you desire. You can also
use placeholders in the text that get replaced later.
As every fan of The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy  knows, asking the right question isn’t
always trivial. The key is to build up a solid repository and refine it as needed. For
example, this is an elementary prompt: 
As an investor, I’m looking at the company {company} . Provide a Boston Consulting
Group (BCG) Framework analysis. Tell me which quadrant the company is in.
The identifier company, enclosed in curly brackets, is a variable that needs to be defined
so that we can fill in the variable content into the string using a Python f-string. Take
your time to refine and extend this prompt as needed to add more context. We stick to
a simple prompt for teaching purposes.
 Each prompt can have multiple contexts. For example, the prompt above may be
helpful if we’re looking for income or growth stocks. It’s a generic prompt that helps
explore new companies. If we already know the company well, asking an LLM about
the quadrant of the BCG framework for a company no longer adds value.
 If we keep a vast number of prompts in a database, we can tag them with a context
that allows us to find them more easily later. You might reuse prompts based on indus-
tries or sectors. In chapter 11, we’ll examine catalysts, which are events that can lead
to a significant change in share prices. Some prompts might be reusable for specific
catalysts, such as earnings calls. The more specific a prompt gets—and remember, the
more specific we ask, the more particular answers we get—the fewer scenarios we can
use these prompts in.
 If we kept a separate table to store tags, we could create an n:m relation in the
table. A tag can be associated with multiple prompts, and a prompt can have multi-
ple tags.
 If we now want to store prompts and tags in database tables, we can use create
table  statements, as shown in listing 9.1. We stripped these tables to the simplest form
possible. This way, you can always fetch prompts from your local database to reuse
them for different scenarios. Remember that you need a SQL console connected to a
database to execute the Data Definition Language (DDL) statements. For exploratory
purposes, SQLite is more than sufficient.
 

224 CHAPTER  9AI agents
create table prompt
(
    id     TEXT primary key,
    prompt TEXT not null
);
create table main.tag
(
    tag_name  TEXT not null,
    prompt_id TEXT not null
);
We can use these tables in an interactive research scenario. We have our Jupyter Note-
book open in our development environment. We might decide to investigate a spe-
cific stock, let’s say, Apple. Later, we investigate alternative stocks, such as Alphabet. If
we have prompts in our database, we can always reload the text of the prompts to send
them to the LLMs.
 Having that, we can always fetch prompts and send them to an LLM—how we
send prompts to an LLM we’ve shown in the chapter before—and we’ll get many
answers. We need to store this information in a secure location. Let’s explore how
we can do that.
9.2.2 Export results
Someone who has worked with various LLM chatbots may be familiar with this situa-
tion. You’re using multiple LLMs. At some point, all the prompts and answers are dis-
persed on many platforms. Various questions on different topics are often intermixed,
making it challenging to find the past results you want to look up immediately.
 One way to prevent that is to store the output in a central repository. In chapter 6,
we used Google Sheets to monitor our portfolio. For our research, we use a structured
note-taking app.
 Notion is a professional note-taking app that enables you to create journals with
multiple pages for notes on a single topic, such as investment research. You can filter
these notes efficiently by tags and sort them by properties such as last edited time or
creation date.
 Figure 9.2 shows a Notion journal in which we made two portfolios. At the top, we
have a unique ID in the URL. This URL contains an identifier: 1a9bc3d9e2cd809-
ca869f99516383ccc. Creating your notebook with the journal will assign a unique
identifier to each page in Python, and you’ll see it in the URL the moment you share
the notebook via the web.
 Let’s learn how to export content to Notion. First, we need a title for the note. The
screenshot displays reference entries, such as INVZ—Initial Investment Thesis. Notion
needs a dictionary structure with a title to create a title page. The following method
contains a basic template. We pass the title in string form as a method parameter.Listing 9.1 DDL Scripts for creating a prompt repository

225 9.2 Agentic workflows without frameworks
Then, we insert the title as a value for the property content below the property text.
We also add it as a value for the property plain_text :
def get_title_property(title: str):
    return {'Name': {'id': 'title',
  'type': 'title',
  'title': [{'type': 'text',
    'text': {'content': title, 'link': None},
    'annotations': {'bold': False,
     'italic': False,
     'strikethrough': False,
     'underline': False,
     'code': False,
     'color': 'default'},
    'plain_text': title,
    'href': None}]}}
With the title  property, we can create pages. As shown in the following code, we trig-
ger a REST call and pass the title  property as a parameter. We receive a return code
and validate that the call has returned a status code of 200, indicating that everything
was successful. The parameter DATABASE_ID  is the unique ID that we collect through
the URL, as described at the beginning of this section.
Figure 9.2 A Notion journal with some reference entries. You can use Notion as a unified storage for all responses 
from multiple LLMs.

226 CHAPTER  9AI agents
def create_page(title_properties: dict) -> str:
    create_url = "https://api.notion.com/v1/pages"
    payload = {"parent": {"database_id": DATABASE_ID}, 
               "properties": title_properties}
    res = requests.post(create_url, headers=headers, json=payload)
    if res.status_code == 200:
        print(f"{res.status_code}: Page created successfully")
    else:
        print(f"{res.status_code}: Error during page creation")
    return res.json()["id"]
The result is a property ID. This ID refers to the newly created page. With that, we
have a new page that we can identify, so we can write content on that page, as shown in
the following code. Again, this is done via REST API, and we insert data through a
JSON-compatible dictionary structure.
def write_to_page(page_block_id: str, data: dict) -> bool:
    edit_url = f"https://api.notion.com/v1/blocks/{page_block_id}/children"
    res = requests.patch(edit_url, headers=headers, json=data)
    if res.status_code != 200:
        print(f"{res.status_code}: Error during page editing")
        return False
    return True
When writing to Notion, it’s essential to note that we can only write up to 2,000 char-
acters simultaneously. For this reason, we must first break down the text into parts to
write a comprehensive answer. The following method shows this. If a write operation
fails, we interrupt the whole process.
def write_chunked(page_block_id, text, chunk_size = 2000):
    for i in range(0, len(text), chunk_size):
        chunk = text[i:i+chunk_size]
        if not write_to_page(page_block_id, create_block(chunk)):
            break
The content is again encapsulated in a JSON-compatible dictionary structure covering
formatting and other topics. In the preceding code, when we call the write_to_page
method, we also call the create_block  method to create this dictionary. We fill in the
text into this template by setting a value for the property content:
def create_block(content : str) -> dict:
    return {
        "children": [
            {
                "object": "block",
                "type": "paragraph",
                "paragraph": {
                    "rich_text": [
                        {
                            "type": "text",
                            "text": {

227 9.2 Agentic workflows without frameworks
                                "content": content,
                            },
                        }
                    ]
                },
            },
        ]
    }
Once this is written, we can embed all the code in a routine to ask a question. List-
ing 9.2 shows this code that would call LLMs and write the results to Notion. For
the note’s title, we combine a stock ticker, the current date, the prompt ID, and the
LLM used. 
from datetime import datetime
def ask_question(stock_ticker: str, prompt_id: str, 
                 prompt_text = None, llm = LLM.OPENAI) -> None:
    date_str = datetime.now().strftime("%Y_%m_%d")
    if stock_ticker:
        properties = get_title_property(
           f"{stock_ticker}-"
           f"{date_str}-{prompt_id}-{llm}")               
    else:
        properties = get_title_property(
            f"generic-{date_str}-{question_id}-{llm}")    
    page_block_id = create_page(properties)
    if prompt_text is None:               
        prompt_text = get_question_by_id(question_id)
    if len(prompt_text) > 0:
        write_chunked(page_block_id, prompt_text)    
        write_chunked(page_block_id, 
                      get_answer(stock_ticker, 
                                 prompt_text, 
                                 llm))      
Figure 9.3 illustrates how a notebook might appear if we continue submitting
prompts. The LLMs return answers, and we can perform fact-checking when we open
the notes to review the answers provided by the LLMs.
 Research is often interactive. With a data science notebook, you have your coding
environment from which you send prompts to an LLM. Collecting information from
our databases allows us to filter by tags and retrieve prompts by referencing their IDs.
The methods in listing 9.3 outline this. You receive all the prompts, along with their
IDs, related to a specified topic. In the reference case, the referenced ID is called
earnings_call .
 
 Listing 9.2 Submitting a prompt
Gets the title 
property
We can also pass text 
directly if we don’t 
want to fetch text 
from a database.
Writes the 
prompt first
Writes the answer 
from the LLM

228 CHAPTER  9AI agents
engine = create_engine('sqlite:///question.db')
all_questions = pd.read_sql('prompt', engine)
all_prompts = pd.read_sql('context', engine)
all_tags = pd.read_sql('tag', engine)
def get_prompt_by_id(id: str) -> str:    
    try:
        return all_prompts[all_prompts["id"] == id]["prompt"].iloc[0]
    except:
        return "No prompt found with that ID"
def get_prompts_per_tag(tag: str):    
    all_prompt_tags = all_tags.loc[
          all_tags['tag_name'] == tag, 
          'prompt_id'].tolist()
    return all_prompts[all_prompts['id'].isin(all_prompt_tags)]
all_prompts_per_category = get_prompts_per_category("earnings_call")
all_prompts_per_category
Then, by calling get_prompt_by_id("earnings_call") , you retrieve the prompt text
for the prompt_ID  "earnings_call" , which could be a prompt such as: “An earnings
call of the company is ahead. What should I check to decide whether to sell my posi-
tion or buy more?” Reading from the all_prompts_per_category  may not be enough,
as the prompt texts may be truncated if you display them on the screen.
 With that, all you need to do is call the ask_question  method with the correct
parameters, such as stock ticker and prompt ID, and you fill up your notion pages with
content. Based on the results, you can seek further details or begin fact-checking.
9.3 Framework for AI agents
Instead of a user communicating directly with the LLM, many frameworks provide
abstraction and add functionality to facilitate the interaction, such as prompt enhance-
ments and retrieval of augmented generation. If a user authorizes the AI agent, they
can access specific resources, such as personal data. Listing 9.3 Getting all prompts for a topic
Figure 9.3 Reference content of an investment research that stores responses in Notion
Gets a prompt 
by ID
Gets all prompts

229 9.3 Framework for AI agents
 We can examine the features of AI agents, as illustrated in figure 9.1 at the begin-
ning of this chapter. Developers are familiar with the distinctions between no-code
and code approaches in various fields of computer science. Data integration is a good
example. Some teams integrate data sources by writing code to interact with frame-
works such as Apache Kafka. They push data into Kafka topics, which are then distrib-
uted to all consumers who have subscribed to that topic. In contrast, other frameworks,
such as Apache NiFi, offer a user interface (UI). Users click on a data source, drag it
to a destination, and configure details.
 Companies often value tools that reduce complexity because they lack sufficient
qualified team members with programming skills. However, critics claim that click-
and-point tools are also just an abstraction of logic. Frequently, these “no-code tools”
miss core functionalities. Perhaps some teams can quickly click themselves into a first
demo, but then, when engineers need to put them into production, integrating non-
custom functionality takes more time, as if programmers had implemented the solu-
tion themselves.
 Using AI agents, developers encounter a similar strategic decision. Some frame-
works allow engineers to create agents via a UI. One of these frameworks is called n8n.
To build a workflow with n8n, you need to register for a user account on the platform,
which gives you access to the workflow UI. Users can create workflows on a canvas,
connecting them to an input, such as a messenger or a chat window. They can incor-
porate various services into the workflow, such as transcribing voice to text or invoking
LLMs with prompts based on the input. Click-and-drag tools are often easier to
grasp by watching videos than by reading books. Numerous interactive tutorials are
available that guide you step-by-step in creating your workflow. Let’s concentrate on
how to build AI agents using programming logic, which is often easier to comprehend
in a book.
9.3.1 From one-shot prompting to agents
Many videos explain what to click and how to collect the results of the past steps to
process further. As this book is titled Investing for Programmers , we aim to focus on creat-
ing workflows in general using development tools. LangChain is a framework for
developing applications that use LLMs. It simplifies the stages of the LLM application
life cycle. LangChain incorporates a broad and growing list of providers ( https:/ /mng
.bz/xZx6 ).
 A provider connects data sources and LLMs. Listing 9.4 shows an example that
executes a one-shot prompt using a LangChain module that wraps code around the
access to OpenAI’s LLMs.
from langchain_openai import ChatOpenAI
OPENAI_KEY = os.getenv("ai.openai.pwd")
llm = ChatOpenAI(
    model="gpt-4o",Listing 9.4 Executing a one-shot prompt using LangChain

230 CHAPTER  9AI agents
    temperature=0,
    max_tokens=None,
    timeout=None,
    max_retries=2,
    api_key=OPENAI_KEY)
messages = [
    (
        "system",
        investment_persona,
    ),
    ("human", "Provide a SWOT analysis of Google."),
]
ai_msg = llm.invoke(messages)  
ai_msg
We implemented the same functionality in chapter 8 using OpenAI’s native libraries.
We can now explore the integration of other LLMs, such as Anthropic ( https:/ /mng
.bz/AGXQ ), and observe that the code structure is similar.
NOTE In chapter 8, we explained how to create an investment persona.
Whenever you use LLMs to analyze investment opportunities, use the oppor-
tunity to provide LLMs as much information as possible about yourself.
Python is a language built on convention. If we have collections, the principle is that
regardless of the data structure used in the collection, the len()  method will always
return the number of items in the collection. Now, we also have a unification with
LangChain. We can assume that, for instance, no matter which LLM we use, the
method invoke()  will always send a prompt to the LLM. This also makes it easier to
add new LLMs, as with native providers, we would have to learn the specific details.
This is a good start, but it’s not yet LangChain’s primary value proposition.
 Let’s explore the snippet in listing 9.5. In this code, we integrate Yahoo Finance
News into our conversation.
from langchain.agents import AgentType, initialize_agent
from langchain_community.tools.yahoo_finance_news import YahooFinanceNewsTool
tools = [YahooFinanceNewsTool()]
agent_chain = initialize_agent(
    tools,
    llm,  # see listing 9.4
    agent=AgentType.ZERO_SHOT_REACT_DESCRIPTION,
    verbose=True,
)
agent_chain.invoke(
    "What happened today with Microsoft stocks?",  
)
This code snippet underlines a substantial difference from plain LLM calls. We use
agents that connect data sources to an LLM. In the code example, we set the verbosenessListing 9.5 Using LangChain with YahooSubmits the prompt
Submits the agent

231 9.3 Framework for AI agents
to True . Let’s look at the output of the agent. Following is the transcript of the previ-
ous listing 9.5, executed in April 2025:
Entering new AgentExecutor chain . . .
I should check the latest financial news for Microsoft to see what happened today.
Action: yahoo_finance_news
Action Input: MSFT
Observation: Is Microsoft (MSFT) the Best Machine Learning Stock to Buy Now?
We recently published a list of the 10 Best Machine Learning Stocks to Buy Now. In this
article, we’re going to take a look at where Microsoft Corporation (NASDAQ:MSFT)
stands against other machine-learning stocks. Grand View Research reported that the
global machine-learning market was valued at $36.73 billion in 2022. It’s now expected
to [ . . .]
Microsoft Corporation (MSFT): Still Among “Cleanest” AI Plays
We recently published a list of 10 AI Stocks to Watch Amid Market Volatility. In this
article, we’re going to take a look at where Microsoft Corporation (NASDAQ:MSFT)
stands against other AI stocks to watch amid market volatility. The uncertain
macroeconomic environment is diminishing investors’ readiness to pay high prices for
stocks related to [. . .]
Thought: Based on the news articles, it seems like Microsoft is still a strong player in the
machine learning and AI markets.
Final Answer: Microsoft stocks are still performing well in the machine learning and AI
sectors.
Finished chain.
As shown in the output, we’ve instructed LangChain to create an AI agent that
explores Yahoo Finance for news and integrates the collected information into
research for a given prompt. We can chain more tools together when running our
research. LangChain also enables us to incorporate providers into our research
using AI agents. We can implement code to access custom data and create custom
data providers for AI agents. This makes LangChain a robust framework that can aid
in research.
9.3.2 Retrieval-augmented generation
We can enhance LLM generation performance by providing additional data that is
inaccessible to LLMs during training. Recent data (e.g., data created after LLM train-
ing) or data unavailable due to restricted access (e.g., internal corporate data) are
good candidates for retrieval-augmented generation (RAG).
 The previous example illustrated how to integrate recent data using Yahoo
Finance. Pulling information from news resources helps balance missing data after

232 CHAPTER  9AI agents
model training. However, countless data sources can be integrated, at least in theory.
In chapter 11, we outline some of them, and they are so huge that you don’t want to
poll them from public web sources during prompting. We need to find a structured
way to provide access to additional data, including storing this extra data in databases.
 In the following example, we’ll add the earnings call transcripts of selected compa-
nies to the prompting. If an LLM had been trained some months ago, it wouldn’t have
had access to data from a recent event in which the executives of a public company
informed investors about the latest results. How do we get the earnings call data? Vari-
ous financial analysis platforms provide transcripts from earnings calls, but the ques-
tion is whether it’s possible to scrape them.
 When you have a vast amount of data, you want to store it in containers that allow
you to keep this data safe and accessible. We separate work to achieve this goal. One
process fetches data from various sources and loads it into a database. Prompt submis-
sions are part of a different approach, in which the LLM uses this database as an
extended brain. Let’s get our hands dirty.
LOADING  DATA
We need to fetch data from different sources. We can scrape pages from various finan-
cial analysis platforms using a web crawler, fetch information from downloaded docu-
ments, or load data via API or databases. Some of this data is also available through
public data exchange. As a reference example, you can load company filings from
Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system (EDGAR) offered by a data
marketplace from Amazon Web Services (AWS; https:/ /mng.bz/Z9a9 ).
 Use cases for professional hedge funds and investment firms, which load data from
various sources (e.g., many commercial providers) into their data platforms, are out-
side the scope of this book. Scraping data from multiple platforms poses a risk for a
book, as many platforms change their internal structures, and code samples that load
data from external web pages may no longer function properly. If you’re interested in
scraping data, you can explore frameworks such as Beautiful Soup and other libraries
that load data from various sources.
 Instead, we provide transcripts from earnings calls of companies in the automotive
sector as text files for download. Feel free to add data if you want to experiment with
the code.
 In listing 9.6, we show how to load these text files into memory. While the logic for
loading files should be familiar to most programmers, be aware that we add the
loaded text to a LangChain-specific data structure to store additional documents for
prompt submission.
from langchain_core.documents.base import Document
all_docs = []Listing 9.6 Loading text files into memory

233 9.3 Framework for AI agents
files = ["pony.txt", "oust.txt", "lazr.txt", "invz.txt", "aeva.txt"]
for f in files:
    file = open(f, "r")
    content = file.read()
    doc = Document(content)  
    all_docs.append(doc)
    file.close()
Let’s provide additional context. In this reference example, we want to explore auton-
omous driving companies. We can run two different contexts to validate the function-
ality. In one context, we state that we believe in Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR)
systems; in the other, we state that we prefer companies that don’t focus on LiDAR.
We’ll submit both contexts separately later to validate that the answers differ. We
expect different recommendations based on our configuration, such as whether we
prefer LiDAR technologies.
 Listing 9.7 outlines how to define and add these preferences to the catalog. Note
that we need to recreate the data structures to rerun the example with a different
context.
generic = """I have a computer science background. I have worked on various
 digital transformation projects for multiple companies. I understand well
 how AI can change companies' businesses. I am looking for stocks of
 companies that might get transformed through AI but have not yet been
 overrun by investors."""
pro_lidar_text = """I believe in the future of autonomous driving. 
Autonomous driving needs a LiDAR system. Do not recommend any companies
 that reject LiDAR."""
con_lidar_context = """Please prefer companies that focus on solutions 
without LiDAR systems as they are expensive."""
all_docs.append(Document(generic + pro_lidar_text))
After executing this script, all the documents have been collected. Let’s transform the
data to be submitted to an LLM. Because we have a large amount of text in memory,
we need to convert it into a format that an LLM can understand.
PREPARING  DATA
We have data in memory, and to use all the content in RAGs, we need to add it to a
vector database. A vector database is a storage container that enables the storage of
vector embeddings. All the variable content in our memory must now be mapped as
vectors. This helps us orchestrate workflows in which, during a prompt submission,
this additional information is evaluated and processed accordingly. We accumulate
vast amounts of information in more advanced scenarios and store it in dedicated
databases, such as PostgreSQL or MongoDB. We use an in-memory database for thisListing 9.7 Providing additional contextLoads data into specific 
containers for LangChain

234 CHAPTER  9AI agents
reference example to focus on the use case and not get distracted by data platform
management. In listing 9.8, we split the data from the documents into subdocuments.
from langchain_text_splitters import RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter
text_splitter = RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter(
    chunk_size=1000,
    chunk_overlap=200,
    add_start_index=True,
)
all_splits = text_splitter.split_documents(all_docs)
print(f"Split blog post into {len(all_splits)} sub-documents.")
Once we’ve split the documents into enough chunks, we need to convert them into
embeddings. Each LLM has its standard. Listing 9.9 shows how to add all the chunks
into an in-memory vector database using OpenAI embeddings.
from langchain_openai import OpenAIEmbeddings
embeddings = OpenAIEmbeddings(model="text-embedding-3-large")
from langchain_core.vectorstores import InMemoryVectorStore
vector_store = InMemoryVectorStore(embeddings)
document_ids = vector_store.add_documents(documents=all_splits)
Now that everything is ready and prepared, we need to move to the final stages: sub-
mitting prompts and evaluating results. We expect to see different results depending
on whether we state that we believe in LiDAR or not, and we also expect some of the
content from the RAG to be reflected in the response.
CALL
In a RAG, we’ll build execution graphs. These involve data structures to help orches-
trate workflows. Programmers who have worked with Apache Spark or Apache Airflow
are familiar with the directed acyclic graph (DAG) concept. We create a class called
Stage  that contains variables for the question, context, and response.
 We also have methods for two stages. In one stage, we retrieve data from the vector
database. Of course, what content we need from the data that we currently hold in
memory depends on the question we send as a parameter. Lastly, we need to submit
the prompt. Listing 9.10 shows this logic. The methods retrieve  and generate  repre-
sent two separate steps in processing the prompt.
from langchain_core.documents import Document
from typing_extensions import List, TypedDict
from langchain import hub
prompt = hub.pull("rlm/rag-prompt")Listing 9.8 Chunking data
Listing 9.9 Adding all text in an in-memory vector database
Listing 9.10 Creating helper structures

235 9.3 Framework for AI agents
class State(TypedDict):
    question: str
    context: List[Document]
    answer: str
def retrieve(state: State):
    retrieved_docs = vector_store.similarity_search(state["question"])
    return {"context": retrieved_docs}
def generate(state: State):
    docs_content = "\n\n".join(doc.page_content for doc in state["context"])
    messages = prompt.invoke({"question": state["question"], "context": 
docs_content})
    response = llm.invoke(messages)
    return {"answer": response.content}
In the next step, we define a question and initialize the LLM. In this example, we use
the GPT-4.1 model from OpenAI:
from langchain.chat_models import init_chat_model
llm = init_chat_model("gpt-4.1", model_provider="openai")
question = "Recommend companies in the autonomous driving sector with good"
  " recent earnings."
Our inquiry is about autonomous driving. We kept the prompt small to focus on clar-
ity. Normally, you would often provide a longer prompt with more context and detail,
as shown in chapter 8.
 Listing 9.11 is our last step before execution. This snippet outlines how the
orchestration works. We add both steps to a state machine and define the retrieve
step as the starting point. The other sequence, generating first and retrieving addi-
tional content later, wouldn’t make sense. Keep in mind that execution workflows
can become more complex with time. In the last line, we call the method to display
the execution graph.
from langgraph.graph import START, StateGraph
from IPython.display import Image, display
graph_builder = (StateGraph(State).add_sequence
                ([retrieve, generate]))           
graph_builder.add_edge(START, "retrieve")         
graph = graph_builder.compile()
display(Image(graph.get_graph().draw_mermaid_png()))  
Figure 9.4 outlines the execution graph where we first retrieve and then generate.
The execution can become more complicated in more complex scenarios, but two
stages are sufficient for this case.Listing 9.11 Building an execution graph
Adds edges to the graph
Displays the 
execution graph

236 CHAPTER  9AI agents
Lastly, invoke the whole graph in which you submit the prompt with the question.
This invocation will also include retrieving information from the vector database:
result = graph.invoke({"question": question})
print(f'Answer: {result["answer"]}')
The author received the following response when presented with a positive context
about LiDAR:
Answer: Based on recent strong earnings and leadership in LiDAR technology for
autonomous driving, Innoviz is recommended. Innoviz has secured partnerships with key
players like Mobileye and integration with NVIDIA’s platform, while expanding
production to meet rising demand. Additionally, Chinese robotaxi companies using
LiDAR technology—with regulatory approvals and commercial fleet operations—are
well-positioned, though specific company names aren’t given in the provided context.
We get a recommendation for Innoviz. If we review the earnings call transcript, we’ll
also find a reference to this partnership with Mobileye. 
 Now, we examine the opposite scenario, in which we claim we don’t prefer LiDAR.
The last Mobileye earnings call wasn’t included in the supplied documents; however,
we can find information on the internet indicating that Mobileye has halted its efforts
on LiDAR:
Based on the context, Mobileye is a notable company in autonomous driving with strong
recent partnerships, OEM programs, and good earnings momentum, focusing on AI-
powered solutions that don’t rely heavily on expensive LiDAR. The context also notes
significant regulatory progress and commercial operation scale among companies with
robotaxi services, suggesting strong business fundamentals for leading players in this
space. Considering your preference to avoid LiDAR-centric approaches and the need for
companies not currently overrun by investors, Mobileye stands out as a promising
candidate.
Figure 9.4 The execution graph from the RAG engines, 
which contains information retrieval from the RAG and 
output generation using RAG and LLM data

237 Summary
We can now run agents with many different data sources. This should be done for
now, and we can investigate charts and perform technical analysis. Many details in this
chapter are based on earlier chapters in which we advocated investing in what we
know. In the same way, to receive good answers, we need to know what to ask, which
leads to the question of what additional context we need to provide. The final part is
submitting the question as a prompt and evaluating the answer.
Summary
Communication with humans and AI has parallels. You can enhance your com-
munication skills by using the right tools.
To communicate more effectively, we can gain access to specific information
sources that would otherwise be inaccessible, allowing us to strategize more
effectively when communicating.
We can store prompts in a simple database to reuse them later.
If you want to research special topics, you can collect all prompts in a database
and tag them to find them on demand.
Notion is a note-taking tool that allows you to export all your research to
one place.
Without specialized frameworks to facilitate AI agents, working with LLMs
requires a significant amount of custom work. For example, accessing specific
data sources for RAG requires writing a substantial amount of code to connect
the data to an LLM.
AI agents help automate and streamline conversations with AI.
AI agents often have providers for additional data sources, which enables us to
orchestrate LLMs to gain new insights.
N8n is a no-code framework that orchestrates workflows using AI agents.
LangChain is a framework for developing applications powered by LLMs. It can
integrate different data sources into AI agent workflows.
LangChain streamlines access to LLMs. All calls to invoke prompts are there-
fore syntactically similar.
LangChain has an extensive list of existing providers and provides an interface
to programmers to add additional providers.
Using LangChain, we can create AI agents that query recent financial news and
then invoke a prompt in an LLM, incorporating the retrieved information into
the analysis.
LangChain provides a mechanism for logging the workflow of AI agents during
their execution, offering valuable insights into how these agents operate.
RAG is an approach to providing an LLM with additional data beyond its train-
ing data.

238 CHAPTER  9AI agents
We can hold additional information for response generation in a vector data-
base. For this, we need to prepare the data by converting it into specific data
structures, known as vector embeddings.
In many complex use cases, we need a data platform such as a RAG database.
For simple use cases, an in-memory vector database is fine.
We can create execution workflows as a graph that orchestrates workflows.

239Charts and
technical analysis
Imagine being presented with a captivating product—something you never consid-
ered but now find yourself intrigued by. The possibilities are endless, whether it’s a
stunning piece of art, a luxurious property, or an exquisite car. Now, picture that
the seller turns to you, eyes glinting with opportunity, and asks, “How much would
you offer?”
 Imagine you’ve never bought a similar product. No advisor stands next to you,
and you can’t ask any search engine or AI chatbot for a reasonable price. Without
any historical data or reference, all you can do is guess.
 Many potential buyers find this situation distressing. If they overpay, they might
regret their purchase for years. However, offering too little can cause issues. A buyerThis chapter covers
Interpreting patterns in charts
How to use candlesticks
Which averages help you assess stocks
Bollinger Bands, moving average convergence 
divergence, and moving average ribbons
Displaying an Ichimoku Cloud
Using Streamlit for visualization

240 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
risks offending the seller or showing everyone around them that they are unaware of
the market value, which can jeopardize their reputation.
 Historical data provide a solid foundation for informed decisions. For instance, if
you know the purchase price of neighboring houses, you can at least estimate the
price of real estate (though you could still end up with a lousy deal for various rea-
sons). The more data you have, the easier it is to determine if the price is reasonable.
 Technical analysis of financial data is, to a large extent, a study of historical price
developments. Knowledge about past movements is good. However, it’s even better
when historical prices are visualized, as many people prefer visuals over numbers in
tables. Let’s start by looking at charts and how we can interpret them. Afterward,
we’ll examine specific charts for investment and explore how to visualize informa-
tion ourselves.
10.1 Charts
In previous chapters, we often plotted charts using share prices over time. The idea that
charts represent data is, therefore, not a new concept. Once you have price and time,
you can plot a chart where the x-axis is usually the time, and the y-axis defines the value
of an asset in a currency. Let’s examine a chart without context in figure 10.1.
We can start making assumptions if we look at a chart without context. Knowing that
the x-axis represents time and the y-axis represents price, we see that the cost of an
asset was relatively stable until approximately the middle of the chart. Then some-
thing happened, and we had a sharp decline with minor corrections in between. We
can make basic observations without context, but to interpret what was going on, we
need details. Let’s add some context and examine figure 10.2.
5800
5600
5400
5200
5000Closing Price
Price
Figure 10.1 A chart without context in which we still must interpret a lot

241 10.1 Charts
With context, we can give meaning to charts. We understand that we’re looking at the
S&P 500. We examine a relatively short interval of a few days, as we have data on the
S&P 500 since its inception on March 4, 1957.
 If we had the data displayed in the chart as a DataFrame, we would have time series
data starting from April 1 at a price of around $5,600 and ending slightly below
$5,000. We don’t know how many data points this DataFrame would hold, as this
depends on the update frequency. We’ll have 60 times as much data if the data is
updated per minute than if it’s updated per hour.
 The price of the S&P 500 data has fallen by 11.15%. Someone who had a value of
$100,000 in an index fund that mirrors the S&P 500 would lose $11,150 in value
within five days. This chart appears alarming to conservative investors, who expect
the value of their assets to increase. But at the same time, let’s look at a chart in fig-
ure 10.3.
 Someone accustomed to price movements, such as those seen with GameStop
stock, might find the changes in the S&P 500 less dramatic. After all, an 11% draw-
down at an index doesn’t mean the value is likely gone forever. Unless there is a dra-
matic shift in the global economy, index prices are expected to continue recovering
and growing. However, the S&P 500 is an index fund, and comparing it to the share
price development of a distressed company is far-fetched. Let’s relate the data to other
past stock market crashes to understand what falling by more than 10% means in a
short time frame. We see in table 10.1 that losses following President Trump’s announce-
ment of sweeping tariffs on foreign goods were comparable to those in the aftermath
of the Lehman Brothers’ collapse.
5800
5600
5400
5200
5000Price^GSPC
2025-03-25 2025-03-27 2025-03-29 2025-03-31 2025-04-01 2025-04-07 2025-04-03 2025-04-05 2025-04-09
DateClosing Price
Figure 10.2 The price development of the S&P 500 (ticker: ^GSPC) after Liberation Day (April 2, 2025), in which 
President Donald Trump announced a fundamental change in the US tariff strategy

242 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
We can also scale out and examine a larger time interval to determine what a drop
in share prices signifies. In figure 10.4, we present the S&P 500 data from Novem-
ber 1996.
 We see some drawdowns in the chart. We see the dot-com crash, the Lehman
Brothers’ bankruptcy, COVID, and the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The
aftermath of Liberation Day will leave a lasting effect on the chart, one that will
remain visible for decades to come. However, even after falling significantly, the S&P
500 remains higher in April 2025 than it was at the beginning of 2024.
 Let’s look at other charts and focus on single stocks. In figure 10.5, we examine
NVIDIA’s share price development.Table 10.1 Five most significant drawdowns in the past few decades
Day Date % Change 
Black Monday October 19, 1987 –24.57
Black Tuesday October 20, 1987 –16.23
Covid-19 pandemic March 12, 2020 –13.93
Lehman Brothers’ collapse November 20, 2008 –12.43
US tariff announcement April 4, 2025 –10.53
Closing PriceGME
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10Price
2021-01-21 2021-01-23 2021-01-25 2021-01-27 2021-01-29 2021-01-31 2021-02-01
Date
Figure 10.3 The extreme price development of GameStop is often seen as a case study for volatile share prices. 
GameStop is a video game retailer whose share price rose after discussions on the subreddit r/wallstreetbets 
suggested that the stock was undervalued. This resulted in significant losses for hedge funds that had shorted 
the stock.

243 10.1 Charts
^GSPC
Closing Price
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000Price
1996 2000 2004 2008 2012 2016 2020 2024
Date
Figure 10.4 The S&P index from November to April 4, 1996, shows various crises in the past, such as the dot-
com bubble burst (early 2000), the housing crisis (2008), the COVID-19 pandemic (2020), the assault on Ukraine 
(2022), and the announcement of tariffs by the United States (2025).
NVDA
Closing Price
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0Price
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Date
Figure 10.5 NVIDIA’s share price data grew by 1787.89% in five years, which is an exceptional result in the 
stock market’s history.

244 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
Single stocks are more volatile than indices. A buyer who purchased NVIDIA shares at
a price equivalent to $6.65 in 2020 would have made a good decision. After five years,
having $120 per share is the fulfillment of every investor’s dream.
NOTE Remember that NVIDIA has undergone two stock splits since 2020. If
you bought one share of stock in January 2020 for $266, it would have been
split into 40 shares.
Technology companies often aim for significant growth, relying heavily on being at
the forefront of innovation to outperform competitors. Consequently, they usually
exhibit a higher price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio and lower dividend payments, as a sig-
nificant portion of the earnings is reinvested in R&D. If competitors outperform
them, a technology company that doesn’t consistently increase its yearly earnings
compared to its competitors can be a risky investment.
 Figure 10.6 outlines NVIDIA’s earnings. As this company grows and generates
more revenue, investors have a positive outlook for a company that continues to grow.
Even if NVIDIA’s P/E ratio is higher today than some of its peers, NVIDIA can be a
good asset when calculating potential future growth.
In chapter 7, our portfolio analysis concluded that, based on historical returns, we
should allocate a greater weight to Pfizer and NVIDIA in a portfolio. Let’s examine
Pfizer in figure 10.7, which tells a different story than NVIDIA’s.
 If we bought Pfizer shares in 2020, we would have less value today. Pfizer is a high-
dividend-paying stock, meaning we would have received annual payments over the
years, which helps balance out some of the missing capital appreciation.
 The Pfizer chart reflects the history of COVID-19. This is also reflected in its earn-
ings, as shown in figure 10.8.
 Earnings are a substantial factor for every company. However, we can’t expect con-
stant increases in earnings in every sector. Pfizer investors would have to accept that
the earnings during the COVID-19 pandemic’s peak can’t last forever. Still, they canJan 2021 Jan 2022 Jan 2023 Jan 2024 Jan 2026 Jan 2027 Jan 20250B60B240B300B
120B180BNVIDIA: Revenue over the years
Figure 10.6 NVIDIA’s annual revenue, including estimates for 2026 and 2027 that were 
reported in January 2025

245 10.1 Charts
also expect Pfizer to continue generating sufficient revenue to pay good dividends
and grow at a steady pace.
 Earnings and share prices can correlate. Often, a profitable year is reflected in the
share price. Investors watch an earnings call, see tremendous results, and buy shares.
If the results are disappointing, they sell. Technical analysis also looks at share prices,
but the focus is different. Technical analysis tries to discover patterns in price develop-
ment to forecast share prices based on these patterns. This may sound like supersti-
tion, but if everyone believes in the same patterns, these patterns will reappear
because some individuals follow these signals, and then many more follow the herd,
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Date50
45
40
35
30
25
20PriceClosing PricePFE
Figure 10.7 Pfizer shares provided no capital appreciation if you bought shares five years ago, which means that 
sometimes buying low and selling high doesn’t always work out.
Dec 2020 Dec 2021 Dec 2022 Dec 2023 Jan 2026 Jan 2027 Dec 20240B25B100B125B
50B75BPﬁzer: Revenue over the years
Figure 10.8 Pfizer had massive earnings during the COVID-19 pandemic, and once it was over, 
the earnings went back.

246 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
causing the repeating trend. Let’s delve deeper by examining charts and defining
these patterns that may influence technical analysts’ decisions.
10.1.1 Reading charts
Let’s examine the charts in figure 10.9. These charts show the price developments of
assets over the past five years.
Some talent shows require candidates to solve challenges. If there were a talent show
for investors, one of the challenges could be to ask contestants to identify the com-
pany when presented with unlabeled charts. Sort of like Name That Tune . Some
investors can do that for familiar charts. They might look at Bitcoin and say some-
thing like this: 
Do you see these two humps on the left? Remember, this was 2021. The year started so
well. In May, I thought I was screwed and then in November I cheered again until . . .
well you know the story, Luna, FTX, it was a nightmare for a while.
Now, there’s a game show I would watch! Identifying some patterns is a start—even if
we don’t have names for them yet—because you create stories based on the patterns.
You rose to the stars, to fall again, and then you were reborn to rise like a phoenix
again! Some stories of share price developments could be dramatized. Let’s have a
closer look.
Figure 10.9 Four charts (NVIDIA, Bitcoin, the 10-year USD T-Notes/T-Bond yield interest rate, and the US dollar 
exchange rate to the euro). Every chart tells a story, and we can assume what was happening.

247 10.1 Charts
10.1.2 Patterns
Let’s examine asset price changes to see if we can identify similarities. The pattern in
the Bitcoin chart, which we previously referred to as humps, can be interpreted as a
bearish double top. Look at figure 10.10, which depicts this pattern and reflects share
price developments (vertical) over time (horizontal).
First, we have an uptrend. Traders are excited; they see momentum and expect more
gains. The asset price will increase as investors see rewards from buying low and sell-
ing high, and continue to buy. Various platforms assess the mood of their clients and
provide a fear and greed index about specific assets. In this phase, investors’ senti-
ment is characterized by extreme greed.
 Then, we reach a point where the mood turns, marked in the chart as Top 1. The
reasons for the trend reversal can be manifold, but investors likely examined the fun-
damentals and judged the asset as overvalued following the price increase. PeopleUniversal principles?
Are there general insights about how prices must move? Let’s give it a try. One prin-
ciple is mean reversion : what goes up must go down again, and vice versa. If we see
mean reversion as a guiding principle, we’re tempted to sell after a massive rally,
believing a market correction is inevitable.
Someone who sees momentum  as a core principle might disagree. If a stock rises,
its momentum can continue to increase. Why sell if a streak is ongoing? Although the
momentum won’t last forever, they will try to ride it as long as possible.
A contrarian investor  might disagree with that assessment. They might say, “I will lose
if I do what the market does. I instead look for something that nobody else does.”
Investors hold different and sometimes conflicting beliefs. If a share price increases,
a believer in mean reversion and a contrarian might advise selling, while a momen-
tum believer might suggest holding or even continuing to buy. Everyone can’t always
be right.
Bearish Double TopNeckline (Support)Top 1 Top 2
Resistance
UptrendBreakout Point
Figure 10.10 The bearish double top is 
a pattern that, after an uptrend, has two 
peaks before it goes down again. If traders 
identify this pattern in time, they can sell 
or buy accordingly.

248 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
start to sell, and the mood changes. However, enough people still see potential in that
asset and begin buying again at some point. The price goes up again. Then, after the
second reversal, the price drops again. But this time, the downtrend continues.
 You can look up many chart patterns online or in technical analysis documents.
They will find many examples, such as the head-and-shoulders, rising wedge, expand-
ing triangle, triple top, or pennant pattern. The basic idea remains the same: there
are up-and-down movements, and a trader attempts to identify patterns based on past
experiences to predict what comes next. Each pattern has a bearish and bullish form,
as shown in figure 10.11.
The double top is a reversal pattern. The bearish version starts with an uptrend and
ends with a downtrend, and vice versa in the bullish version. It’s also a continuation
pattern. It starts with a trend until it gets into an opposite trend, to turn into its origi-
nal trend again. Figure 10.12 provides an example of bullish and bearish flag patterns
as a reference for a continuation pattern. Again, we start with a trend being disrupted
by an opposite trend. Eventually, however, the original trend continues in a continua-
tion pattern.Bearish Double Top Bullish Double Top
Figure 10.11 A bullish double top and its “twin”, the bearish double top. Investors looking up other 
chart patterns, such as the head and shoulders or rising wedge, will always find bullish or bearish 
patterns.
Bearish Flag Pattern Bullish Flag Pattern
Figure 10.12 The bullish and bearish flag patterns are reference examples for continuation patterns. 
A temporary initial trend was reversed and continues again in the same direction.

249 10.1 Charts
Chart patterns are just templates. “Chart whisperers” have often been wrong in the
past. Many of them have misjudged movements, as there is no guarantee that asset
prices will always follow the pattern.
 When an asset’s price falls, analysts often discuss support lines. A support line  is a
price level at which an asset is unlikely to fall. Investors also frequently discuss resis-
tance lines , which are high prices that are difficult to break through. Another import-
ant term is breakout , when a price crosses a support or resistance line.
 Support and resistance lines are essential for investors who explore more volatile
assets. At the time of writing, the price of 1 Bitcoin is $78,940. Analysts may suggest
that we see a support line at $72,000, which is another way of saying that it’s unlikely
for the price to drop below that level unless an external event occurs.
 Although support and resistance lines are an interpretation of data, we must not
overlook the psychological effect. Imagine a resistance line at $100,000. You see prices
going up and down, and when the price is nearing $100,000, you may hear yourself
arguing in your head. The more adventurous you might say: “Come on, buddy! Buy!
It’s an asset that will always go up in the long run. Today is the day, you’ll see.” The
more cautious you will reply to that, something like: “Investors are rational beings.
The price of that asset is already so high, and six digits are huge. While you buy below
$100,000, others will sell, and the price will decrease. You’ll sit on an asset you can’t
sell for profit. Better to wait until the price drops.” Again, your adventurous part
might reply, “What if it crosses the resistance line and never goes back? We must buy
now, or it’s too late.” While knowing current resistance or support lines is essential for
traders, long-term investors may ignore them, as their idea is that assets will continue
to grow over a long period.
 The shorter the time window you aim to hold an asset, the more critical chart pat-
terns become. Short-term traders tend to borrow resources—using leverage—to buy
assets. If they don’t sell soon, they must pay interest.
 Conclusively, charts can help traders and investors decide when it’s a good time to
buy and sell. Additionally, long-term investors won’t ignore them entirely. Let’s exam-
ine how we can interpret a chart.
10.1.3 Interpreting a chart
Many financial analysis platforms such as TradingView, Finviz, and Seeking Alpha provide
advanced charting features. They allow you to plot the share prices, and you can add
indicators on top of the chart showing price movements. This chapter will show how to
plot some of these indicators in later sections using Python. But be aware that the indica-
tors presented in this book, such as moving averages, Bollinger Bands, or Ichimoku
Cloud, are a small selection of the existing indicators that advanced charts provide.
 Figure 10.13 shows a chart on Finviz.com, which also provides charting functional-
ities. You can view the chart with the latest data on that asset (NuScale Power Corpora-
tion) at https:/ /finviz.com/quote.ashx?t=SMR&p=d . The screenshot is based on data
from June 13, 2025.

250 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
Technical investors attempt to identify bearish and bullish patterns based on such
charts. You can even paste screenshots like the previous one into a GenAI chatbot and
ask the LLM to recognize patterns. It will return interpretations and, in some cases,
even speculate on possible price developments based on signals such as a golden cross
in late May, which describes that an SMA 50 crossed above the SMA 200 (we’ll investi-
gate simple moving averages [SMAs] later in this chapter).
 Some investors argue that the effectiveness of technical analysis hasn’t been
proven and consider it a form of gambling. Others will tell you they start making
money if they are successful, just 51% of the time. Whether you try to leverage price
patterns for short-term trading or not, reading charts is also essential for long-term
investors, as they tell an important story over time.
 An asset has momentum, which is often reflected in patterns on the chart. Time is
also an essential aspect of reading a chart. While a share price might decrease in the
short term, a long-term trader may not be overly concerned if they still see a long-term
upward trend. A short-term trader who has borrowed money to buy leveraged assets
must make decisions earlier, as they must pay interest on the borrowed funds.
 Technical traders develop algorithms to analyze moving averages, Bollinger Bands,
Fibonacci retracements, Elliott waves, and other technical indicators. Many technical
investors employ SMA crossover strategies, such as the 200-day SMA versus the 5-day
SMA. Let’s look at some of these principles to understand what this is all about.
10.1.4 Alternative chart types
While we primarily use line charts to visualize the price of an asset over time, investors
often employ other chart types as well. Let’s explore some of them. 
Figure 10.13 A NuScale (SMR) chart provided by Finviz.com shows how quickly we can perceive price 
movements over a longer time when the details are visualized.

251 10.1 Charts
TREEMAPS
Treemaps have become popular on platforms such as Finviz. They show the growth
and fall of prices. Figure 10.14 shows the treemap displayed on Finviz. 
BAR CHART
Bar charts can help show the distribution of elements within a category. Again, Finviz
provides an excellent example that can be explored at https:/ /finviz.com/groups
.ashx . In figure 10.15, we can see which sectors did well within one day. Finviz also pro-
vides bar charts that reflect the performance of assets over an extended period.
HISTOGRAM
Histograms plot the distribution of values for a numeric variable as a series of bars, so
we can use them to validate whether the data follows a Gaussian distribution. In chap-
ter 7, we used a histogram in a Monte Carlo simulation to display returns, as shown in
figure 10.16. Here, we have them distributed well-balanced over a Gaussian curve.
SCATTERPLOT
In chapter 8, we used a scatterplot to plot companies. A scatterplot helps to identify
interesting assets if you group multiples of them based on various criteria. For exam-
ple, if we’re interested in examining multiple assets based on risk and returns, we can
plot them in a scatterplot with risk and return axes, as shown in chapter 8.
Figure 10.14 A treemap from Finviz gives us an idea about price movement. Check out today’s chart 
(https:/ /finviz.com/map.ashx ) to get the latest data, drill down, interactively, and get a better impression of 
how much you can read through the color scheme.

252 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
We again display the figure from chapter 8 in figure 10.17 to immediately illustrate
the value of a scatterplot. We see three outliers. The dot on the far left represents an
asset that has lost significant value. If we hovered over the dot, we would know that it’s
Moderna, a capital-intensive business that is, among other things, affected by high fed-
eral interest rates. The topmost dot represents Super Micro Computer, a semiconduc-
tor company that had been in turmoil due to its failure to report on time, whichBasic Materials
Energy
Technology
Health Care
Financial
Industrials
Utilities
Consumer Defensive
Consumer Cyclical
Real Estate
Communication Services1 DAY PERFORMANCE
0% 0.5% 1% 1.5% 2% 2.5% 3% 3.5% 4%+3.64
+1.71
+1.59
+1.49
+1.16+1.49+1.49+2.93
+2.35
+2.07
+1.85
+1.31
+1.28
Figure 10.15 A bar chart showing the distribution of growth by sector within a day. Bar charts are effective for 
illustrating the distribution of elements within a group.
Figure 10.16 This shows a histogram of Apple’s returns over time, indicating that the returns of Apple 
follow a normal distribution, which, in other words, means there’s no need to worry about the stock’s 
performance.

253 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
caused its share price to plummet. On the far right, we have Palantir, whose high
returns are also reflected in its P/E ratio, as indicated by a review of that ratio.
10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
We learned how charts can help us gain faster insights than viewing the raw data. In a
sense, charts are a shortcut to data analysis. Now, we shift our focus slightly toward
analyzing price movements by putting them into context, which is essential for some
investment and trading strategies.
 At the beginning of this chapter, we highlighted that a price tag without additional
knowledge and context can be confusing. Something we want to buy has an intrinsic
value, also called the real value. The essential pattern in trading goods that existed
already before the advent of money was to get a better value in goods exchange. This
universal principle also applies to securities: we can make good or bad deals depend-
ing on the price we pay to acquire an asset.
 When studying fundamentals, as we did in the previous chapters, we examine a
company’s details to determine whether an asset has lost or gained value. Efficient
market theorists, such as Eugene Fama, say that assets are priced approximately at
their worth unless you’re an insider and know things the rest of the investors can’t
know. Some experts disagree with the efficient market theory, as some investors have
repeatedly beaten the market.
 By analyzing fundamentals, you determine what you believe the company is worth.
You investigate changes in balance sheets and other documents to hypothesize
whether an asset is undervalued or overvalued based on changes within the company.
Analyzing price development in charts is a different approach, often called technical
analysis. In this aspect, you examine price developments over time concerning what
the market thinks the company is worth to determine trends, so you time your pur-
chases accordingly. Let’s get started.
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2Volatility
−1.5−
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
ReturnsFigure 10.17 A scatterplot that 
categorizes stocks by volatility 
and returns

254 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
10.2.1 Candlesticks
Candlestick charts visualize price movements in financial markets. They provide insights
into market sentiment and show how prices fluctuate within a given time frame.
 A candlestick chart is like a time series plot, but enhanced with additional informa-
tion about a stock, cryptocurrency, or other financial asset’s open, high, low, and close
(OHLC) prices. Let’s look at the anatomy of candlesticks to see how they work.
ANATOMY  OF A CANDLESTICK  CHART
Figure 10.18 shows NVIDIA’s candlestick chart for three trading days with each can-
dlestick representing a day in this chart. Time is scalable, meaning we can view it in
terms of hours or months in such a chart.
Candlesticks use different schemata. On most platforms, the schema is represented
by green and red colors. White and black are also common for other use cases, such
as in print media like this book. If the candlestick is green or white, it means that,
within the specified period—one day in our example—the closing price is higher
than the opening price, indicating a bullish movement. If the closing price is lower
than the opening price, the body is red or black, indicating a bearish movement (the
price has decreased). If you’re interested in seeing charts as examples, you can explore
platforms such as Finviz ( https:/ /finviz.com ) or TradingView ( www.tradingview.com ),
w h e r e  y o u  c a n  d r i l l  d o w n  i n t o  c h a r t s  a n d  z o o m  i n  o n  s p e c i f i c  d a y s  t o  e x a m i n e
Figure 10.18 This candlestick diagram references three trading days of NVIDIA, from which we deduce 
price movements. Days 1 and 3 ended with a lower closing price than the opening price, and we can also 
see that on Day 3, the price was more volatile than on the preceding days.

255 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
details. It’s also often helpful to study charts of companies you know, as you can
usually see how investors reacted to specific catalysts affecting your company (see
chapter 11).
 Figure 10.19 shows the anatomy of a candlestick. The height of the candle’s
body represents the difference between the opening and closing prices. The wicks,
also known as shadows, represent the highest and lowest prices reached during the
trading period, as depicted by a candle. The upper wick extends from the top of
the body to the highest point, and the lower wick extends from the bottom to the
lowest point.
Knowing all of this and referring to figure 10.18 shown earlier, the share price began
at $138 on January 10th. It rallied up during the day until it reached $140, but it also
fell at some point to a bit above $134, to end a bit below $136.
 T o  c r e a t e  a  p l o t  s i m i l a r  t o  t h e  f i g u r e  1 0 . 1 9 ,  w e  n e e d  t h e  m p l f i n a n c e  l i b r a r y ,  a
Python library for financial data visualization. We load data from NVIDIA and plot it
as shown in listing 10.1. We get the same result as in figure 10.6 earlier.
import mplfinance as mpf
import pandas as pd
import yfinance as yf
ticker = "NVDA"
data = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(start="2025-01-10", end="2025-01-15")
df = pd.DataFrame(data).dropna()
mpf.plot(df, type='candle', style='charles', title='Candlestick Chart')
Now, let’s examine candlestick patterns in more detail to understand how we can inter-
pret their price movements. For that, we need to examine multiple consecutive days.Listing 10.1 Creating candlestick chartsWick
WickBodyHighest Highest
Opening
OpeningClosing
Closing
Lowest LowestFigure 10.19 The anatomy of a 
bullish (white) and bearish (black) 
candlestick

256 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
CANDLESTICK  PATTERNS
Candlestick patterns enable traders and investors to interpret price action quickly. We
can detect market trends, reversals, and continuation patterns by analyzing multiple
candles, such as the following:
Long wicks indicate rejection and support of certain price levels.
Small bodies suggest indecision in the market.
Large bodies indicate strong momentum.
Some patterns are commonly used to predict price movements, as shown in figure 10.20:
Doji—The opening and closing prices are almost the same, forming a small
body, which signals market indecision.
Hammer —A small body with a long lower wick indicates a potential reversal
after a downtrend.
Engulfing —A large candle that completely engulfs the previous one signals a
substantial shift in momentum.
Using the terminology from the figure, we can describe the patterns. A Spinning Top
is a pattern in which, on two consecutive days, we experience high price volatility
during the trading day but end up with a Doji. As another example, a Shooting Star is
a pattern that has a high volatility during the day, and then the closing price is lower
than the opening price. Being able to give the patterns names facilitates discussions
about trends with other investors. 
 Now that we know how to interpret candlesticks, we can investigate averages over
multiple periods to gain a deeper understanding of the share price development.
Let’s discuss that next.Spinning Tops Shooting Star Hammer Doji Bullish Engulﬁng
Bearish Engulﬁng Evening Star Morning Star 3 Soldiers 3 Crows
Figure 10.20 Various candlestick patterns in which we can describe the behavior of the 
market. In addition to the Doji, Hammer, and Engulfing patterns, we can see the volatility 
of prices. You immediately realize that candles with long bodies represent high volatility, 
whereas candles with multiple short bodies represent a calm market situation.

257 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
10.2.2 Charts based on averages
At the beginning of the chapter, we highlighted the importance of data about past
purchases. Imagine an item listed for $100. Knowing that similar items have been sold
for $80 on average will lead you to consider it differently than knowing that the item is
usually sold for $120.
 When working with shares with frequent price changes, we must examine price
developments over an extended period. In addition to highs and lows, one central
benchmark is the average price: you have three numbers—let’s take 1, 2, and 3—and
everyone with basic math skills knows that the average is 2. Let’s explore some more
complex scenarios.
 Let’s take the closing price of a stock for x days and calculate the average by adding
all values and dividing them by the total number of values. If we look at changes over
time, we set a window (say 20 days) and calculate the average. When we add a new
value to an existing set of 20 days, we remove the oldest value from the set. This is that
simple moving average (SMA) that we mentioned earlier in the chapter .
 We might wonder if it’s efficient to weigh all numbers the same. Would it not
make sense to weigh the more recent values higher than the oldest ones? For this
reason, other average calculation formulas incorporate weighting, such as the expo-
nential moving average (EMA), weighted moving average (WMA),  and Hull moving average
(HMA) , which we explore in this chapter . The goal is to smooth price data and iden-
tify trends earlier. As different average calculations have different goals, they target
different scenarios.
 In listing 10.2, we create a data set for demonstration and then apply the SMA and
EMA. The EMA weights the later values more. We define a set of random data and use
the algorithms.
import pandas as pd
data = {
    "Date": pd.date_range(start="2023-01-01", periods=10),
    "Price": [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19],
}
df = pd.DataFrame(data)
window_size = 3
df['SMA'] = df['Price'].rolling(
    window=window_size).mean()      
df['EMA'] = df['Price'].ewm(
    span=window_size, adjust=False).mean()    
Looking at the results, the EMA returns a slightly higher result (17.003906) for the
mean of 16, 17, and 18 than 17, which would be the result of SMA based on these num-
bers. These differences don’t seem significant unless you consider large transactions. IfListing 10.2 Calculating SMA and EMAs
SMA is the unweighted 
mean of the last N 
values.
EMA gives more weight 
to recent values.

258 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
you trade millions, it will have a considerable effect. Let’s compare data using histori-
cal share prices and add the remaining two average calculations.
NOTE We’ll use an option to limit floating-point numbers behind the decimal
point, using the following parameter to enhance visualization: pd.options
.display.float_format  = '{:,.2f}'.format .
The WMA also weights averages, but unlike the EMA, it does this linearly, balancing
some of the differences between the EMA and SMA. The HMA uses the WMA as a
base to smooth out the extra by adding half the time window and the square root of
the time window in the calculation. If you’re interested in the details, you can look up
the math; in brief, the formula is HMA > WMA > EMA > SMA. The further to the left,
the more sensitive our calculations are to recent changes. Let’s look at the Python
implementation in the following code:
def weighted_moving_average(prices, window):
    weights = np.arange(1, window + 1)
    return prices.rolling(window).apply(
       lambda x: np.dot(x, weights) / weights.sum(), raw=True)
def hull_moving_average(prices, window):
    half_window = int(window / 2)
    sqrt_window = int(np.sqrt(window))
    wma_half = weighted_moving_average(prices, half_window)
    wma_full = weighted_moving_average(prices, window)
    hma = weighted_moving_average(2 * wma_half - wma_full, sqrt_window)
    return hma
Now that everything is defined, let’s load data from NVIDIA for 2024 and compare the
results. In the following code, we load the data and add all averages of the closing
prices to the DataFrame.
import yfinance as yf
ticker = "NVDA"
data = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(start="2024-01-01", end="2024-12-31")
averages = pd.DataFrame(data).dropna()
averages.reset_index(inplace=True)
def add_averages(close, window_size):
    close['SMA'] = close['Close'].rolling(window=window_size).mean()
    close['EMA'] = close['Close'].ewm(span=window_size, adjust=False).mean()
    close['WMA'] = weighted_moving_average(close['Close'], window_size)
    close['HMA'] = hull_moving_average(close['Close'], window_size)
    return close[['Date', 'Close', 'SMA', 'EMA', 'WMA', 'HMA']]
Examining the data, we observe that the larger the window we use, the more not a
number (NaN) values we encounter at the beginning of the DataFrame. We’ll confirm
that each average has slightly different values. Let’s extract a single entry and look at
it. In table 10.2, we display the average for a 3-day window on February 2, 2024. In the
row below, we show the average for a 20-day time window on the same day.

259 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
Examining the EMA, WMA, and HMA, we can conclude that the more recent data is
weighted, the closer the results will be to the closing price of the last day. The SMA is
further away from the closing price. We can also conclude that the SMA reacts more
slowly to price changes than other moving averages. This doesn’t have to be negative;
if we look for long-term trends, recent spikes wouldn’t bother us. We can sum up with
the following conclusions:
SMA is the best for long-term trend analysis.
EMA is suitable for short-term trading strategies that require quicker reactions.
WMA offers a balance between EMA and SMA, emphasizing recent prices.
HMA is the most effective approach for detecting rapid trends.
We can also create another hypothesis. Regardless of which moving average we use, we
can also employ different time windows, which provide us with distinct insights. Let’s
look at that next.
MOVING  AVERAGE  RIBBONS
Moving average ribbons  visualize trend strengths: narrow ribbons indicate consolidation,
and wide ribbons show strong trends. In listing 10.3, which plots moving average rib-
bons, we use six windows: 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60.
import yfinance as yf
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
ticker = "NVDA"
df = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(start="2024-01-1", end="2025-01-1")
df.reset_index(inplace=True)
periods = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60]               
for period in periods:                           
    df[f"SMA_{period}"] = df["Close"].rolling(
        window=period).mean()                    
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
plt.plot(df["Date"], df["Close"], label="Price", color="black", 
linewidth=1.5)
for period in periods:
    plt.plot(df["Date"], df[f"SMA_{period}"], label=f"SMA {period}")
plt.title("Moving Average Ribbon")
plt.xlabel("Date")
plt.ylabel("Price")Table 10.2 Multiple averages for the same day, each with a different time window
Window (days) Closing SMA EMA WMA HMA
3 66.14 63.55 64.29 64.33 67.96
20 66.14 58.33 58.83 60.60 64.19
Listing 10.3 Plotting moving average ribbons
Creates different 
windows

260 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
plt.legend()
plt.grid()
plt.show()
The results are shown in figure 10.21. We observe fewer movements in May and Octo-
ber, indicating that the price has been more stable than at other times, where the rib-
bons are more spread out.
NOTE We’ll explore multiple SMA trading strategies in chapter 11. In that
chapter, we’ll also examine optimal time windows for trading strategies and
investigate whether standard parameters, such as the SMA 50 versus the SMA
200, are optimal.
Let’s look at Bollinger Bands next to understand better how we can show overbought
or oversold conditions more clearly.
BOLLINGER  BANDS
Bollinger Bands  is a popular technical analysis tool that measures price volatility and
identifies overbought or oversold conditions in a security. They use the following
parameters:
Middle band —This is a 20-period SMA, representing the average price over the
chosen period. The default value is 20, and traders can adjust it. Too high or too
low values risk being overly sensitive or not responsive enough to trading signals. 
Moving Average Ribbon
140
120
100
80
60Price
2024-01 2024-03 2024-05 2024-07 2024-09 2024-11
Date2025-01Price
SMA 10
SMA 20
SMA 30
SMA 40
SMA 50
SMA 60
Figure 10.21 Moving average ribbons that contract around 2024-05 and 2024-10, indicating that the market 
was consolidating at that time

261 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
Upper band —This equals the middle band plus two times the standard deviation
of price, representing a level often seen as overbought or a resistance area.
Lower band —This equals the middle band minus two times the standard devia-
tion of price, representing a level typically considered oversold or a support
area.
Let’s use Python code to plot Bollinger Bands and then interpret them. We collect
technical data from a stock and calculate the bands with the parameters defined in
listing 10.4. We first load stock tickers. Then, we define 20 as the default window and
calculate the necessary values for the bands described in the preceding list. Lastly, we
plot the Bollinger Bands.
import yfinance as yf
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
ticker = "NVDA"
data = yf.download(ticker, start="2024-01-01")
window = 20                                   
std_dev_factor = 2                            
data['SMA'] = data['Close'].rolling(
    window=sma_window_length).mean()          
rolling_std = data['Close'].rolling(
    window=sma_window_length).std()           
data['rf'] = (rolling_std * std_dev_factor)   
data['upper'] =  data['SMA'] + data['rf']     
data['lower'] =  data['SMA'] - data['rf']     
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
plt.plot(data.index, data['Close'], label="Close Price", color="blue", 
linewidth=1)
plt.plot(data.index, data['SMA'], label=f"{window}-Day SMA", 
color="orange", linewidth=1.5)
plt.plot(data.index, data['upper'], label="Upper Bollinger Band", 
color="green", linestyle="--", linewidth=1)
plt.plot(data.index, data['lower'], label="Lower Bollinger Band", 
color="red", linestyle="--", linewidth=1)
plt.title(f"Bollinger Bands for {ticker} (20-day window)", fontsize=14)
plt.xlabel("Date", fontsize=12)
plt.ylabel("Price", fontsize=12)
plt.legend()
plt.grid(alpha=0.3)
plt.show()
Figure 10.22 shows the Bollinger Bands. The plot represents all the lines we’ve cre-
ated based on the preceding formulas. Now, we should see more evident upper and
lower barriers.Listing 10.4 Plotting Bollinger Bands
Calculates 
the bands

262 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
Bollinger Bands expand during periods of high volatility and contract during periods
of low volatility. Around August 2024, the closing price also exhibited significant fluc-
tuations. Typically, following periods of high volatility, we experience a phase of con-
traction, indicating a consolidation period and a potential breakout.
 Prices tend to stay within the band. We attempt to identify moments when it devi-
ates, which signals price action, potential trend continuation, or reversal. In late April
2024, the share price was below 80 and crossed the lower band, signaling a possible
buy opportunity. At the same time, around 2024-06, we have a sell signal. While buying
in April 2024 would have led to profits, the sell signal in June 2024 would have
resulted in losses if we hadn’t identified this as a strong uptrend, which likely would
have rendered the sell signal obsolete. 
 In chapter 11, we’ll test strategies using backtesting. But let’s move forward to the
next indicator.
MOVING  AVERAGE  CONVERGENCE  DIVERGENCE  (MACD)
The Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD)  is a momentum-based technical
indicator used to spot potential buying or selling opportunities in the market. It ana-
lyzes the relationship between two moving averages of a share price: the short-term
and long-term moving averages. Let’s examine the details of MACDs. As we can see,
we use different window sizes or periods to detect buy or sell signals:
MACD line —The difference between a short-term EMA and a long-term EMA.
Commonly, the 12-period EMA is subtracted from the 26-period EMA.
Figure 10.22 The Bollinger Bands for NVIDIA provide insight into potential days to buy or sell shares.

263 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
Signal line —A nine-period EMA of the MACD line, which is a trigger for buy or
sell signals.
Histogram —A visual representation of the difference between the MACD and
signal lines. When the histogram is above 0, the MACD line is above the signal
line, indicating bullish momentum. Conversely, when it’s below 0, bearish
momentum is indicated.
Let’s examine the code in listing 10.5. In the calculate_macd  method, we calculate
the EMA_12  and EMA_26  based on the close price. With that, we get the MACD  and, con-
sequently, the signal line. After calculating the MACD  parameter, we plot the MACD
chart using the method plot_macd .
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
def calculate_macd(data, short_window=12, long_window=26, signal_window=9):
    data['EMA_12'] = data['Close'].ewm(
        span=short_window, adjust=False).mean()      
    data['EMA_26'] = data['Close'].ewm(
        span=long_window, adjust=False).mean()       
    data['MACD'] = data['EMA_12'] - data['EMA_26']   
    data['Signal_Line'] = data['MACD'].ewm(
        span=signal_window, adjust=False).mean()     
    return data
def plot_macd(data):
    plt.figure(figsize=(12,6))
    plt.plot(data.index, data['MACD'], label='MACD', color='blue')
    plt.plot(data.index, data['Signal_Line'], 
      label='Signal Line', color='red')
    plt.bar(data.index, data['MACD'] - data['Signal_Line'], 
      label='Histogram', color='gray', alpha=0.5)
    plt.legend(loc='best')
    plt.title('MACD Indicator')
    plt.xlabel('Date')
    plt.ylabel('MACD Value')
    plt.grid()
    plt.show()
import yfinance as yf
ticker = "NVDA"
df = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(start="2024-01-01")
df = calculate_macd(df)
plot_macd(df)
We obtain the data from NVIDIA in a chart, as shown in figure 10.23. We can then
examine historical buy and sell signals.
 Buy and sell signals are identified by crossover signals. We have a bullish signal
when the MACD line crosses above the signal line. We see them before March 2024Listing 10.5 Moving Average Convergence Divergence
Calculates the 
MACD parameter

264 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
and again in May 2024. A bearish signal occurs when the MACD line crosses below the
signal line. This indicates downward momentum and may suggest a potential selling
opportunity, particularly near or around April 2024. We also need to examine the
zero-line crossings and conclude that the sentiment was more bearish in March 2025
than in March 2024.
 The larger the histogram bars grow, the more it suggests increasing momentum in
the current trend. Shrinking bars indicate weakening momentum, which might hint
at an impending reversal.
 Understanding MACD can be particularly useful if you build or use algorithmic
trading systems. While MACD is a powerful tool, it’s not foolproof. It may produce
false signals in choppy or sideways markets. For confirmation, it’s best used with other
indicators or fundamental analysis.
 In chapter 11, we’ll also examine how we can back-test such strategies and how
much money we would have made or lost if we had used this strategy for buying or
selling. Let’s explore the next technical indicator.
10.2.3 Ichimoku Cloud
The Ichimoku Cloud (or just Ichimoku) is a charting technique used in technical
analysis that provides a comprehensive view of price action by incorporating trend,
momentum, and support and resistance levels in a single chart. Unlike SMAs or can-
dlesticks, the Ichimoku offers a multidimensional approach to understanding market
conditions.
MACD Indicator
10
8
6
4
2
0
−2
−4MACD Value
2024-01 2024-03 2024-05 2024-07 2024-09 2024-11 2025-01 2025-03
DateMACD
Signal Line
Histogram
Figure 10.23 Shows the MACD for NVIDIA closing prices. Whenever a signal line crosses the MACD, a trading 
signal is generated.

265 10.2 Using charts to interpret price changes
NOTE The Ichimoku Cloud often uses Japanese terms for its key elements.
They have been omitted from this book for clarity and brevity. You can look
them up on Investopedia or similar sites.
Although it may appear complex initially, breaking it down into its components makes
it much easier to understand. The Ichimoku consists of five key elements:
Conversion line —A short-term moving average that reacts quickly to price changes
Baseline —A medium-term trend line used as a momentum and trend direction
Leading span A —Forms the first boundary of the cloud, acting as dynamic sup-
port or resistance
Leading span B —Forms the second boundary of the cloud
Lagging span —Helps confirm trends by comparing the current price to past prices
We adjust the time windows for the averages accordingly. The conversion line has a
lower window (nine days), and the baseline has longer time windows. We also use the
base and conversion lines to calculate other lines, as demonstrated in the code. 
 Let’s implement the Ichimoku using Python and Matplotlib in listing 10.6. We
reload the NVIDIA data, calculate all parameters, and then plot them.
import yfinance as yf
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
ticker = "NVDA"
data = yf.Ticker(ticker).history(start="2024-01-10", end="2025-01-15")
df = pd.DataFrame(data).dropna()
df.reset_index(inplace=True)
df["ConversationLine"] = (df["Close"].rolling(
  window=9).max() + df["Close"].rolling(
  window=9).min()) / 2                                  
df["BaseLine"] = (df["Close"].rolling(
  window=26).max() + df["Close"].rolling(
  window=26).min()) / 2                                 
df["SpanA"] = ((df["ConversationLine"] 
                + df["BaseLine"]) / 2).shift(26)        
df["SpanB"] = ((df["Close"].rolling(
               window=52).max() + df["Close"].rolling(
               window=52).min()) / 2).shift(26)         
df["LaggingSpan"] = df["Close"].shift(-26)              
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
plt.plot(df.index, df["Close"], label="Close Price", color="black")
plt.plot(df.index, df["ConversationLine"], label="ConversationLine", 
color="red")
plt.plot(df.index, df["BaseLine"], label="BaseLine", color="blue")
plt.fill_between(df.index, df["SpanA"], df["SpanB"], 
  where=df["SpanA"] >= df["SpanA"], color="lightgreen", alpha=0.5)
plt.fill_between(df.index, df["SpanA"], df["SpanB"], 
  where=df["SpanA"] < df["SpanB"], color="lightcoral", alpha=0.5)Listing 10.6 Creating an Ichimoku
Calculates the 
parameter for 
the Ichimoku

266 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
plt.plot(df.index, df["LaggingSpan"], label="LaggingSpan", color="purple", 
linestyle="dotted")
plt.title("Ichimoku Cloud")
plt.legend()
plt.show()
Now, let’s look at the plot results in figure 10.24. We can see that we had essentially a
bullish momentum, as evidenced by the many green (light gray in grayscale) clouds.
The space between spans A and B forms the Ichimoku Cloud, and green (light gray in
grayscale) means that span A is above span B. It’s a bullish signal. If span B is above
span A, the cloud is red (dark gray in grayscale), a bearish signal.
 The cloud acts as support in an uptrend and resistance in a downtrend. We can use
them to identify trends:
If the price is above the cloud, the market is in an uptrend.
If the price is below the cloud, the market is in a downtrend.
If the price is inside the cloud, the market is in a consolidation phase
(uncertainty).
We can also look for buy and sell signals:
Bullish signal (Buy) —When the conversion line crosses above the baseline while
the price is above the cloud
Figure 10.24 An Ichimoku for NVIDIA closing prices indicating multiple bullish moments

267 10.3 Visualization with Streamlit
Bearish signal (Sell) —When the conversion line crosses below the baseline while
the price is below the cloud
The cloud acts as support in uptrends and resistance in downtrends. A thicker cloud
suggests stronger support or resistance, making it harder for the price to break through.
10.3 Visualization with Streamlit
In certain situations, it can be beneficial to visualize results online. Although some of
you may have experience with advanced web technologies, others may not want to
delve into a powerful but complex solution. We need a technology that keeps visual-
ization simple and straightforward.
 One way to quickly generate web UIs is to use the Streamlit library, which can be
installed as a Python package. Streamlit allows us to define web controls, and once we
execute the Python files, it generates a local web page. Note that we use traditional
Python files in the following example (ending with the .py extension), not the data
science notebooks used throughout the rest of the book.
 Listing 10.7 provides a simple example of plotting returns. We have multiple pre-
defined tickers and define input controls to collect the start and end times of the plot.
The code’s logic checks whether one or more stocks have been selected. If we have
the data, we calculate the returns and plot a line chart. 
import streamlit as st
import pandas as pd
import yfinance as yf
st.title("Finance Dashboard")
tickers = ('TSLA', 'AAPL', 'MSFT', 'ETH-USD', 'BTC-USD')
dropdown = st.multiselect("Select Ticker", tickers)
start = st.date_input('Start Date', pd.to_datetime('2024-01-01'))
end = st.date_input('End Date', pd.to_datetime('today'))
def relativeret(df):
    rel = df.pct_change()
    cumret = (1+rel).cumprod() -1
    cumret = cumret.fillna(0)
    return cumret
if len (dropdown) > 0:
    df = relativeret(yf.download(dropdown, start=start, end=end))['Close']
    st.header(f"Returns of {dropdown}")
    st.line_chart(df)
We start the Streamlit website by calling the Streamlit application on the command
line using the syntax streamlit  run <pythonfile> . We need to open our web browser
and follow the directions in the command line to view a figure similar to the one dis-
played in figure 10.25.Listing 10.7 Displaying returns with Streamlit 

268 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
Now that we understand the principles of Streamlit, we can plot moving average rib-
bons, Bollinger Bands, MACDs, and candlesticks. In the code shown in listing 10.8, we
use select boxes instead of multi-select controls, as in the previous examples, because
we’ll always examine one company at a time. Be aware that this listing omits the logic
for Bollinger Bands, MACDs, and moving average ribbons, as it’s identical to the code
previously shown in the listings and has been incorporated into methods. The com-
plete code for this chapter, as well as the code for the other chapters, is available for
download from the Manning site for this book. We added the technique to display a
plot from the Streamlit library, mplfinance, for the candles. As with mplfinance, you
Figure 10.25 The returns of Apple and Tesla in a chart rendered on a website by Streamlit

269 10.3 Visualization with Streamlit
need to pass a specific parameter, returnfig=True,  so that the plots can be plotted
correctly. To display a selected chart, we pass a method parameter to the method and
call it to create the plot, which will then be plotted.
import streamlit as st
import pandas as pd
import yfinance as yf
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import mplfinance as mpf
st.title("Technical Analysis")
ptype = ('NONE', 'MA', 'BOLL', 'MACD', 'CANDLE', 'CLOUD')
tickers = ('TSLA', 'AAPL', 'MSFT', 'ETH-USD', 'BTC-USD')
dropdown = st.selectbox("Select Ticker", tickers)
plot = st.selectbox("Select Plot", ptype)
start = st.date_input('Start Date', pd.to_datetime('2024-01-01'))
end = st.date_input('End Date', pd.to_datetime('today'))
def bollinger(data):
    pass
def macd(data):
    pass
def ma(data):
    pass
def cloud(data):
    pass
def candle(data):
    fig, ax = mpf.plot(data, type='candle', 
style='charles',figsize=(15,10), title='Candlestick Chart', returnfig=True)
    return fig 
def plot_ta(title: str, method):    
    st.header(title)                
    plt = method(df)                
    st.pyplot(plt)                  
if len (dropdown) > 0 and plot != 'NONE':
    df = yf.Ticker(dropdown).history(start=start, end=end)
    match(plot):
        case 'BOLL':
            plot_ta("Bollinger bands", bollinger)
        case 'MA':
            plot_ta("Moving Average Ribbons", ma)
        case 'MACD':
            plot_ta("MACD", macd)
        case 'CANDLE':
            plot_ta("CANDLE", candle)
        case 'CLOUD':
            plot_ta("CLOUD", cloud)Listing 10.8 Streamlit Technical Analysis
Method to plot 
the chart

270 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
In figure 10.26, we can see a reference example of the result using Bollinger Bands. If
you run the Streamlit application downloadable from the GitHub repository for this
book, you’ll also be able to plot other charts.
Figure 10.26 A Streamlit web page displaying Bollinger Bands

271 Summary
To sum it all up, even if you’re not a technical trader who identifies buy or sell opportu-
nities based on chart patterns, charts can help you understand better how share prices
are evolving. You can use charts to identify potential weak points in your portfolio and
combine this analysis with a reevaluation of your investment thesis for the stock.
Summary
Every chart tells a story. If you plot the share price development of an asset,
you’ll also see the effect of catalysts—events that propel significant changes in
asset prices.
You need to put price movements into context. For some asset classes, you
expect more or less volatility than for others.
You can look for patterns in a chart to predict future development.
Patterns, such as the double top, serve as a reference example. These patterns
can reveal a trend, but identifying them can be tricky, as they are merely tem-
plates of the past.
Chart patterns can be categorized into two main groups: reversals and continu-
ations. The first follows a trend and then reverses it; the second continues to fol-
low a trend.
Treemaps of a full stock market, popularized by platforms such as Finviz, pro-
vide a comprehensive overview of all constituents within the stock market.
Bar charts allow the display of the distribution of participants in a group. You
can visualize the assets within an exchange-traded fund (ETF) weighted by
their size.
Histograms are ideal for plotting daily returns. If their returns follow a Gaussian
distribution, everything is in order.
Scatterplots can be used to detect specific assets within a group of assets.
Candlesticks provide insights into market trends and movements during the
period represented by a candle.
A candlestick body represents the price difference between the security’s open-
ing and closing prices. The wicks of a candlestick identify the maximum and
minimum price during a trading day.
We can identify patterns across multiple trading days using candlesticks and
name trends. Some prominent patterns in candlesticks that identify trends are
Doji (opening and closing prices are almost the same), Hammer (possible
reversal after a downtrend), and Engulfing (a substantial shift in momentum).
You can calculate averages in many ways; some approaches weigh values
differently:
– Use simple moving averages (SMAs) for long-term trend analysis.
– Use exponential moving averages (EMAs) for momentum and recent changes.
– Use weighted moving averages (WMAs) for fast-moving signals.
– Use Hull moving averages (HMAs) for lag reduction with smoothness.

272 CHAPTER  10 Charts and technical analysis
Moving average ribbons are a way to plot multiple moving averages with differ-
ent time windows over the closing price of a stock.
If moving average ribbons contract, we can identify a consolidation in the share
price.
Use Bollinger Bands to analyze volatility and price extremes, as they can be eas-
ily detected when they cross the upper and lower bands plotted in the chart.
Moving average convergence divergence (MACD) measures the relationship
between two moving averages of a share price. Use MACD for momentum and
crossovers.
Traders look for crossovers in such charts, as they serve as trading signals to buy
or sell stocks.
Streamlit is an excellent way for Python programmers to visualize content on a
web page without needing to learn web programming.

273Algorithmic trading
Now that you’ve mastered technical analysis with charts, this chapter introduces
algorithms for trading strategies, transforming raw insights into actions. This step
is the culmination of everything we’ve covered: collecting data, analyzing ratios
and charts, assessing risks, and integrating machine learning (ML) and large lan-
guage models (LLMs). We’ll bring it all together and outline scenarios for apply-
ing it.
 Various scenarios affect trading strategies. Some algorithms perform better in
bull markets than bear markets, or vice versa. Catalysts are specific moments that
signal more volatility in the market, which can be an opportunity or risk. We’ll
review catalysts from a trading perspective.This chapter covers
Quantitative analysis
Testing strategies using backtesting
Catalysts as game changers
The difference between exchanges and brokers
Executing orders with Python
Order types and modalities

274 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
 In the third part of this chapter, we’ll demonstrate how to place orders program-
matically using Interactive Brokers and Alpaca. We’ll explore different order types,
parameters, and their implications, learning how to apply them effectively.
11.1 Nonfinancial data
In chapter 3, we categorized data for financial analysis. In chapters 4 and 5, we con-
ducted ad hoc research to build portfolios. Then, we showed how to monitor our port-
folio, explored ML and LLM applications, and analyzed charts. As shown in figure 11.1,
three data sources, including their update frequencies, are used to create data models
and algorithms for trading decisions. The efficient market theory says that an asset
price represents the knowledge of all investors, and therefore, individual investors
can’t beat the market in the long run. But what if we get insights that nobody else or
only a few investors have? We won’t likely find these hidden gems of knowledge in fun-
damental or technical data, as investors have tried to explore financial data for
decades. Let’s focus on the nonfinancial data, as this category is the newest source for
insights, and not everyone might have explored all possibilities.
Let’s explore how much data has changed the investment approach to understand
how nonfinancial data has added a new flavor to investment and trading strategies.
Many investors have read about investment basics from books about Warren Buffett,
who often refers to his mentor, Benjamin Graham, as the father of sophisticated
investment techniques. If we read classic books by Graham such as Security Analysis
Fundamental Data Technical Data Nonﬁnancial data
Seconds
Seconds/Minutes Months
Figure 11.1 Three types of data flow can lead to insights, and nonfinancial data, 
being the newest of them, is especially interesting.

275 11.1 Nonfinancial data
or The Intelligent Investor , we can imagine a young Warren Buffett getting his informa-
tion from newspapers and seeing him and his partner, Charlie Munger, making
deals in person with other investors in the pre-information age. We can hardly imag-
ine an investment legend such as Warren Buffett in front of a Bloomberg terminal
studying data or exploring Python scripts using an Integrated Development Envi-
ronment (IDE).
 Films such as Wall Street  or The Big Short  can also influence perceptions of the
investment profession. These films feature computers already in use for trading. Many
documentaries and movies also illustrate an era when the internet was a game
changer, allowing us to respond to fast-moving signals that would have taken earlier
investors significantly more time to uncover.
 The time between Warren Buffett’s early years (think of investing without comput-
ers) and trading stocks around the financial crisis in 2008 (think of investors looking
at a screen at green or red charts) shows how digitalization changed for investors.
What may be less obvious is how much has changed since the early information age.
In the millennium years, it was unimaginable that one person’s statement in the
media could cause share prices in the world to fall or rise by more than 10%.
 The effect on share prices after President Donald Trump changed US tariff poli-
cies has confronted everyone with a new reality: data originating outside the world of
finance—social media posts can, after all, be collected in real time and added to trad-
ing algorithms as a decision factor—sometimes affects share prices more than finan-
cial data. In the future, we might screen social media for significant messages like we
study charts for investment decisions.
 Social media data is just one subcategory of the generic nonfinancial data category.
Let’s explore more categories of nonfinancial data to help us gain insights about pos-
sible share price movements. When exploring different categories of nonfinancial
data, we’ll discover that one difference between financial and nonfinancial data is that
different categories of nonfinancial data sources have different relevance for various
sectors and industries. Social media data is, in most cases, more relevant to consumer-
oriented companies than companies that focus on business-to-business (B2B) solu-
tions. This separates nonfinancial from financial data sources because the latter
includes sources that everyone must provide. In other words, serious investors might
skip social media analysis but not numbers in the balance sheets.
Structured trend analysis
Controversial topics make some debaters’ blood boil. Let’s take nuclear energy as a
reference. Opponents claim that building nuclear power plants takes a long time and
is costly. They also warn about the dangers of atomic meltdowns and raise concerns
that nuclear waste threatens future generations. Proponents of nuclear energy praise
the constant flow of energy as an addition to the volatile energy from renewables and
advocate for the energy density of nuclear power plants.

276 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
11.1.1 Big data by example
Beyond fundamentals and technicalities, additional data sources will broaden our per-
spective on asset investability. This exploration leads to many different data sources
and use cases, which we can group by sectors and industries. They are more complex
to use than the data that is available out of the box. An overview of the possibilities of
enriching data models with financial data can still be beneficial, as access to rare data
in a treasury may be the differentiator that determines profit or loss.
Investment management company Renaissance Technologies (RenTech) started col-
lecting data early, which may be one reason for its success. Still, we shouldn’t collect
data for the sake of collecting data. We need to develop an investment thesis, and
once we’ve explored all the fundamentals, we need to consider what additional infor-
mation is required to validate our thesis. Next, we examine how to obtain the data.
 We can hypothesize that Google’s share price will soar in the upcoming years due
to Waymo. Some may even speculate that Waymo’s success will affect Google like the
iPhone did Apple. We can read up on articles stating that Waymo could become a
cash cow. But articles are just one-time opinions. We need to find data sources that
prove the growing importance of Waymo: (continued)
If you put opponents and proponents in a room, the chances are high that debates
will be heated. Those who fight for their cause want to win debates, either out of
years-long conviction that has blinded them or because they represent a lobby. You
might not gain any meaningful insights if you listen to debates.
Investors can explore trends instead by using nonfinancial data: How many new
nuclear power plants are being built? How many papers about nuclear energy have
been written? What do research papers say about the future energy demands of data
centers? How do the prices of companies on the stock exchange that focus on
nuclear energy change? Collecting that information is feasible and can be added as
a factor to algorithms.
Is big data equal to a big company?
Many data sources can help us gain valuable insights. For example, satellite imagery
or data from telecommunications providers can reveal movement trends. But does
this mean we need to be part of a large corporation to access such data?
Not necessarily. Some datasets are available for purchase through marketplaces
such as AWS Data Exchange or Snowflake Marketplace. If you’re a programmer devel-
oping analytical models, selected paid external data sources can be useful. However,
because we don’t want to require you to subscribe to commercial data services, this
section remains more theoretical than others in this book.

277 11.1 Nonfinancial data
Hard facts on the number of drives per week
Rollouts of new Waymo services to new cities
Reduced number of reports on robotaxi accidents
Let’s see how we can collect this information. The sections are intended to give you
some ideas on how to add specific details to your models. In some cases, this also
means investing in external data sources, as many insights might not be available
through free data sources.
MEDIA
We get most of the media information from the web. We can collect information from
various sources, such as social media, traditional media, and blog posts, using crawlers
and APIs. We can also transcribe video data to text.
 We can learn more about trends using a vast pool of information on Waymo: Is
Waymo mentioned more often over time? In what context is Waymo mentioned? How
positive was the mood when people talked about Waymo? Are the deployments to new
cities on time?
NOTE Human emotions are a category of nonfinancial data. The CBOE
Volatility Index (VIX) is a popular measure of the stock market’s expecta-
tion of volatility based on S&P 500 index options. There are many engaging
scenarios matching sentiments in the media with price changes from that
index.
MOVEMENT  DATA
We can use geolocation and movement data to explore what is happening in an area.
Using satellite and webcam images, we can count objects, such as different car brands
on the streets, if we have computer vision skills. Knowing the growth rate of Waymo
cars in certain areas will give us additional insights into their overall success.
 You might wonder if collecting and analyzing “exotic data” is worth the additional
effort. Even with the vast amount of satellite data available, running computer vision
algorithms and training models to identify specific objects correctly requires signifi-
cantly more effort than exploring mainstream data.
 The efficient market theory says that the share prices of one company represent
the total information available to all investors. Engineers who find ways to collect and
analyze data not available to everyone may have a way to get a competitive advantage
as investors. Never underestimate the value of “underrepresented” data.
DEMOGRAPHIC  DATA
Demographic data tells you about the demands of a population. As a long-term inves-
tor, you see more demand for hearing aids than for skateboards if statistics tell you
that the population in an area is aging.
 The demand for Waymo services may follow demographic developments. Autono-
mous driving can be popular with teenagers who aren’t allowed to drive themselves,
and it can even be an incentive for them to postpone a driver’s license if they start

278 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
using robotaxis. Think also about handicapped and older adults who might face chal-
lenges driving themselves. 
 One core thesis is that using robotaxis is part of a mindset shift, and that we can
detect this mindset shift in people. If we evaluate the data, we can gain insight into the
behavior of target groups.
11.2 Catalysts
In finance, a catalyst  is a trigger that propels the price of a stock dramatically up or
down. Earning reports, new analyst ratings on stocks, product announcements, legisla-
tive changes, lawsuits, mergers and acquisitions, bankruptcy declarations, and the
involvement of activist investors are good examples.
 A catalyst is an opportunity to buy or sell positions when we expect the share price
to change more than usual. Anyone interested in quantitative or algorithmic trading
may focus on specific catalysts and build models specifically created for them.
11.2.1 Mergers and acquisitions
Nothing lasts forever, and everything with a beginning also has an end. In business as
in life, growth is followed by maturity, saturation, and eventually decline. Some see the
cycle of life and rebirth even as a philosophical principle far beyond business. One
principle is that, in the end, everything is just a transformation. Figure 11.2 outlines a
business life cycle with multiple phases. Imagine a company that has a stunning prod-
uct idea. As it enters the market, many customers want to own that product, and this
company grows and reaches maturity.
Many companies face competitors over time unless they have a strong economic moat.
New rivals enter the market, and at some point, the sales growth of key products starts
to slow down. Everyone is clear that without a new hit, the company will be unable to
keep up with its past performance.IntroductionGrowthMaturity
Saturation
DeclineRebirth
TimeStage progressionFigure 11.2 How companies 
might evolve. The shaded 
area marks a window of 
opportunity. A merger or 
acquisition can rescue a 
company in decline.

279 11.2 Catalysts
Some companies may lack the resources to revive themselves in a market saturated
with competitors. Maybe they’ve lost too much money to have a proper R&D budget
for the next big thing in their products and services. In the corporate world, mergers
and acquisitions (M&A)  are one strategy to prevent decline if you don’t have enough
resources to reinvent yourself. The executives may see a chance for an early revival by
joining forces with another company, either by merging or by acquisition.
 The idea of a merger is 1 + 1 = 3 ; that is, the combined entity with all possible syn-
ergies is more potent than the sum of its parts. By merging two companies with com-
plementary products, they expand their offerings and streamline operations. An
acquisition is more one-sided: a larger company absorbs a smaller one, integrating it
into its structure, for example, Microsoft acquiring GitHub while keeping it distinct
within its corporate structure.
 For investors, M&A events represent both opportunities and risks. When a com-
pany is announced to be acquired, its stock price often surges, benefiting existing
shareholders. If two public companies merge, investors might see long-term value cre-
ation. Most mergers look excellent on paper, but what happens when two distinct cor-
porate cultures, operational systems, and management styles clash? What if employees
resist the integration? Not all M&As deliver the expected value; some even destroy
shareholder wealth instead of creating it.
NOTE An investor might assume that the executives will prevent a merger if
they believe a cultural mismatch exists. For some executives, an exit is a suc-
cessful end of an era, and all the troubles will be passed on to a successor.
Therefore, whether all executives involved in a merger or acquisition always
have altruistic goals in mind is doubtful.
We can build models that focus on M&As and try to determine the key parameters that
indicate success or failure. In the preceding section, we talked about nonfinancial data.
Many data sources tell us if an M&A is successful. We can, for instance, analyze senti-
ment data in blog posts and comments. We might find the insights we need if we can
access data from LinkedIn, Glassdoor, or other providers of employees’ sentiment.
11.2.2 Companies in distress
“Cigar butt investing” is an investment strategy famously associated with Warren Buf-
fett’s early years, inspired by his mentor Benjamin Graham. It’s like finding a dis-
c a r d e d  c i g a r  o n  t h e  g r o u n d ,  t a k i n g  o n e  l a s t  f r e e  p u f f ,  a n d  t h r o w i n g  i t  a w a y .  I t ’ s  a
hazardous approach, and Warren Buffett abandoned it. Still, there’s an opportunity to
make money.
 You need to find cheap, discarded assets. You look for deeply undervalued compa-
nies, often ignored or struggling, but still have some potential. You buy the stock at a
deep discount, wait for a slight rebound, and then sell at a profit. Once the market
recognizes the company’s fair value and the stock price rises slightly, sell it before its
deeper problems surface.

280 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
 This strategy is like hacking together an old repository to get a quick fix—it can
work, but it’s risky, inefficient, and not a long-term plan. You look for companies that
are close to bankruptcy and explore all the data to find out if there’s a way this com-
pany can be bought or rebound. Figure 11.3 shows the workflow of a company in dis-
tress. The later an investor gets involved, the more risk they face.
You can look for companies that filed for bankruptcy. Some may have a stalking horse
agreement , which is a binding purchase agreement between a seller (often in bank-
ruptcy or financial distress) and an initial bidder. This agreement sets the floor price
and terms for an asset sale in a competitive bidding process, ensuring the asset isn’t
sold for too little. Many shareholders might want to liquidate their positions because of
a bankruptcy, fearing they could lose everything. If you believe that a company in dis-
tress is interesting enough and that competitors are interested in acquiring it, you can
buy when the share price is at its bottom and try your luck. Just be aware that this can go
wrong, even with intensive research, and you might lose these assets completely.
WARNING Y o u ’ l l  f i n d  s o m e  e x a m p l e s  o f  c o m p a n i e s  t h a t  w e n t  b a n k r u p t  y e t
managed a turnaround, generating huge gains for risk-taking investors. Just
keep in mind, these cases are rare—in most bankruptcies, equity is wiped out
as creditors assume ownership.
11.2.3 Earnings calls
Every company has quarterly earnings calls, during which executives discuss the past
quarter. Depending on the company, stocks can move quite a lot. The central ques-
tion is whether the company met its earnings expectations. If so, how big was the sur-
prise, positive or negative? Executives might also discuss many topics during earningsCompany is
in distress.
Company goes
bankrupt.
Company is closed.Company is reopened.
Figure 11.3 The workflow of a company in distress and its possible turnaround depending 
on its assets

281 11.2 Catalysts
calls besides earnings. Taking the transcript of an earnings call and running a senti-
ment analysis can be insightful. 
 One way to prepare for earnings calls is to start researching a few days before. For
example, you should explore when executives last acquired or sold their shares, which
could indicate a possible move. You can also find many online reports about new or
closed deals of that company to predict an earnings surprise , which refers to diverging
from the expected earnings.
 One question is whether to trigger an order during an earnings call or before-
hand. You can imagine that some investors might listen to the call for insights on pre-
pared orders to buy and sell; when a message indicates possible price movements, they
will place an order. So, if you have a strong intuition, you can buy or sell in advance. 
11.2.4 Disasters
The COVID-19 pandemic was a game changer on the stock market. The shares of
many companies fell rapidly. There were notable exceptions, however. Examining bio-
tech companies such as Moderna and Pfizer reveals significant profits, as evidenced by
their share price history.
 With every disaster, there are winners and losers. Natural catastrophes, such as
wildfires and hurricanes—we’ll see more of them thanks to climate change—may
challenge businesses, such as insurance companies. Companies that produce solu-
tions to mitigate catastrophes, such as companies that help with early wildfire detec-
tion, will benefit. Wars challenge the economies of countries that are involved,
directly or indirectly. Looking at the share prices of Rheinmetall, a German defense
industry company, underscores that there are also beneficiaries of wars.Earning calls strategies
If you’re bold, consider a leveraged purchase ahead of likely significant price move-
ments. If your broker allows leverage of, let’s say, $500,000, and you bet on a share
that rises by 10%, you’ll earn $50,000 in a day. However, you could also evaporate
$50,000 in one day if the price decreases by 10%. Many investors advise against
leveraged orders, even if they feel confident about the company’s performance. After
all, the market is unpredictable. NVIDIA has made numerous record-earning calls, yet
investors remain cautious, fearing that NVIDIA might be overvalued; if the gains fall
short of expectations, they may still decide to sell.
Another way of approaching earnings calls is to trade options instead of shares. They
provide leverage with lower up-front costs. If you buy options, your risk is clearly
defined, as you know in detail what you spend on your premium. You can also use
specific option strategies to net on increased volatility without predicting the exact
direction of the stock’s move. 
Primarily, if you focus on small and midsize companies, where more volatile and
more surprising developments are possible, trading options can feel like casino-
style gambling.

282 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
 You can generate profits by addressing potential upcoming disasters early. You can
use momentum or long-term strategies. To clarify the difference, let’s consider wild-
fires as an example. As a long-term investor, you buy shares of companies that help
prevent or mitigate wildfires. As climate change worsens, new disasters will boost
demand for these solutions. With momentum investing, you can short sell insurance
stocks before a major catastrophe happens. Predicting disasters is difficult. Any entre-
preneur who can develop such an innovative system will likely get even wealthier by
selling their services to governments.
11.2.5 Interest rate changes
The relationship between the federal interest rate and the share prices may be one
of new investors’ most overlooked parameters. We can learn a lot from the past.
Alan Greenspan was a Federal Reserve (aka Fed) director who aimed to keep the
interest rate low. If the federal interest rate is low, companies can borrow money
cheaply, leading to more investments and lower unemployment. Side effects of low
interest rates can be manias—some might remember the subprime mortgage crisis
of 2008, which was partly also triggered by the availability of cheap money, and
higher inflation.
 The Fed policies around COVID-19 are a good lesson about the effect of interest
rates on share prices. Biotech companies focusing on research, such as Moderna,
show a clear picture. During COVID, Moderna did well thanks to high earnings, but
the interest rates went up to curb inflation. The share prices of capital-intensive com-
panies, including Moderna, struggled after the pandemic.
 One strategy is buying capital-intensive shares when interest rates are high but
share prices are low. When the Fed lowers interest rates, the shares of capital-intensive
companies will likely go up. There’s a big catch, though. Some capital-intensive com-
panies that haven’t secured a stable cash inflow are at risk of bankruptcy during high
interest rates.
NOTE If you’re a freelancer programmer, you might have noticed that you
receive more offers on average when interest is low. Companies prefer not to
spend money when borrowing is expensive. LLM prompts such as “What is
the outlook for freelancers to get new gigs based on the current economic sit-
uation, and when will it improve?” can be used for deeper research.
11.3 Trading algorithms
By continuously screening for data spikes—such as shifts in public sentiment or
unusual price movements—we can establish rule-based trading strategies:
If X happens, we buy.
If Y happens, we sell.
The key is defining what X and Y are. X and Y must be quantifiable, as an algorithm
must determine if the buy or sell event has been reached.

283 11.3 Trading algorithms
 Before hunting for X and Y, let’s first focus on validating results. Any programmer
familiar with test-driven development (TDD) understands the importance of defining
validation criteria before implementing logic. Even the most sophisticated strategies
risk being unreliable or misleading without a solid validation framework.
11.3.1 Backtesting
Backtesting evaluates trading strategies using historical data. Let’s illustrate this con-
cept with an example. In the chapter on technical analysis, we explored moving aver-
ages and observed that a simple moving average (SMA) crossover can serve as a buy or
sell signal. This strategy involves calculating two SMAs with different time windows
based on a stock’s closing price:
When the shorter-period SMA crosses above the longer-period SMA, it signals
a buy.
When it crosses below, it signals a sell.
Let’s test this strategy with historical prices. To begin, we need generic methods.
The first step is adding SMA calculations to a DataFrame of historical prices. As we’ll
use SMAs with different time windows within a DataFrame, we must also validate if
the SMA with a specific time window has already been added, as shown in the follow-
ing snippet:
def add_sma(df: pd.DataFrame, lower: int, upper: int) -> pd.DataFrame:
    if f'sma_{lower}' not in df.columns:
        df[f'sma_{lower}'] = df.Close.rolling(lower).mean()
    if f'sma_{upper}' not in df.columns:
        df[f'sma_{upper}']  = df.Close.rolling(upper).mean()
    return df
Let’s explore the backtesting method shown in Listing 11.1. We pass a DataFrame con-
taining historical data loaded from a yfinance ticker object. Additionally, we specify
parameters for the lower and upper periods of the SMAs and the number of shares
to trade. We define a Boolean parameter to trigger a buy order on the first trading
day to make tests more comparable with other results.
NOTE In this backtesting strategy, we’ll sell or buy a predefined number of
shares. After one signal, we wait for a reverse signal as the following action,
and we don’t trigger the same signal twice in a row. We can repeat the same
orders in intervals, including short selling for advanced scenarios. We can
also adjust the number of shares to trade. But let’s keep things simple.
def backtest(df: pd.DataFrame, lower: int, upper: int, shares : int, 
  buy_first_day = False) -> pd.DataFrame:
    schema={'date': 'datetime64[ns]', 'action': 'str', 'cash_movement':
 'float64'}
    results = pd.DataFrame(columns=schema.keys()).astype(schema)Listing 11.1 Backtest

284 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
    if buy_first_day:
        results.loc[len(results)] = [df["Date"].iloc[0], "Buy", 
df["Close"].iloc[0] * shares * -1]
        waiting_for_bear = True
    else:
        waiting_for_bear = False
    for index, row in df.iterrows():
        if not waiting_for_bear:
            if row[f"sma_{lower}"] > row[f"sma_{upper}"]:
                results.loc[len(results)] = [row.Date, "Buy", 
                   row.Close * shares * -1]
                waiting_for_bear = True
        if waiting_for_bear:
            if row[f"sma_{lower}"] < row[f"sma_{upper}"]:
                results.loc[len(results)] = [row.Date, 
                                             "Sell", 
                                             row.Close * shares]
                waiting_for_bear = False
    if waiting_for_bear:
        results.loc[len(results)] = [df["Date"].iloc[-1], "Sell", 
df["Close"].iloc[-1] * shares]
    return results
Let’s run some tests. We want to use a fixed amount of money in a target currency as a
benchmark to compare the performance of different stocks. We calculate the number
of stocks to buy from this initial investment sum. The higher the share price, the fewer
shares we would buy.
 We need a baseline to measure our strategy’s success: the difference between the
shares bought on the first day of the plan and those sold on the last day of the strategy.
We also need to account for transaction costs. If we spend $1 for one transaction, we
can subtract the number of transactions from the total gains of our SMA strategy. If an
SMA strategy leads to better results than this, it’s successful.
Does company outlook matter?
In the following reference example, we start backtesting with NVIDIA. One argument
could be that using NVIDIA might not be a good choice, as NVIDIA has been one of
the most successful companies in recent years. Would it make more sense to use a
company whose performance is cyclical?
We’ll look at more companies in this chapter, but starting with a successful one helps
us establish a baseline. People who follow long-term investment strategies try to pick
companies with a good outlook based on strong past earnings and economic moats.
Traditional long-term investors don’t touch their investments for years. So, what does
it mean if we learn that with a trading strategy, we can make the returns of a company
that already provides good returns even better?

285 11.3 Trading algorithms
We’ll execute a test for NVIDIA using $1,000 and calculate 10 years of data. In this first
test scenario shown in listing 11.2, we take 10 trading days for a lower SMA window
and 20 trading days for the upper time window.
def run_single_backtest(ticker: str, cash, start_date: str, end_date: str, 
transaction_costs = 1) -> pd.DataFrame:
    df = load_data(ticker, start_date, end_date)
    shares = round(cash / df["Close"][0])
    print(f"Shares: {shares}. start price: {df["Close"][0]}. end price: "
          f"{df["Close"].iloc[-1]}. to beat: {df["Close"].iloc[-1]*shares – 
                                                 df["Close"][0]*shares – 
                                                 transaction_costs}")
    df = add_sma(df, 10, 20)
    res = backtest(df, 10, 20, shares, True)
    gain = res['cash_movement'].sum()
    gain = gain - transaction_costs * len(res['cash_movement'])
    print(f"Gains: {gain})")
    return df
results_nvda
 = run_single_backtest("NVDA", 1000, "2015-01-01", "2025-01-01")
Looking into the console output, we can buy 2,070 shares on January 1, 2015. We cal-
culate that this leads to a performance to beat of $276,980, which is quite impressive
for 10 years. There’s a small caveat, though, that we need to highlight: NVIDIA went
through stock splits. This means the initial NVIDIA stocks at the beginning of January
1, 2015, didn’t cost $0.48.
 Running this simulation, it turns out that an SMA10/SMA20 crossover strategy is
unsuccessful. We would have made $177,960 in 10 years, clearly below $276,980.
 Let’s see if we can do better with other time window parameters. To do this, let’s
create a DataFrame that provides parameter combinations:
x = pd.DataFrame(np.arange(10, 210, 10))
test_params = pd.merge(x,x,how='cross')
test_params.columns = ['sma_lower','sma_upper']
test_params = test_params[test_params.sma_lower < test_params.sma_upper]
We can now adjust the method to run the same test with various time windows, start-
ing with 10 (the lowest) and 200 (the highest). Listing 11.3 shows the same logic as
with single runs, just with a for loop in between that uses all configurations.We’ll contrast this strategy of using NVIDIA with other companies and then see if we
can develop a more generic idea of whether trading algorithms make sense. One small
spoiler alert: the answer is—as you might have expected—it depends. For decades,
traders and investors have debated whether sophisticated trading strategies lead to
better investment results, and so far, there’s no clear winner in this debate.
Listing 11.2 Executing a single backtest

286 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
def run_multiple_backtests(ticker, investment_sum = 1000):
    schema={'lower': 'int64', 'upper': 'int64', 'gain': 'float64'}
    results = pd.DataFrame(columns=schema.keys()).astype(schema)
    df = load_data(ticker, start_date)
    shares = round(investment_sum / df["Close"][0])
    print(f"Shares: {shares}. start price: {df["Close"][0]}. end price: "
          f"{df["Close"].iloc[-1]}. to beat: {df["Close"].iloc[-1]*shares –
             df["Close"][0]*shares}")
    for n,m in test_params.values:
        df = add_sma(df, n, m)
        res = backtest(df, n, m, shares)
        gain = res['change'].sum()
        results.loc[len(results)] = [n, m, gain]
    sorted_results = results.sort_values(by='gain', ascending=False)
    return sorted_results
ticker = "NVDA"res_nvda = run_multiple_backtests(ticker, 
    investment_sum = 1000)
res_nvda
While we learned that a setup using SMA10 and SMA20 doesn’t beat the baseline for
our initial test, a different setup does. Table 11.1 shows the five best results for
NVIDIA. With a maximum of $309,821.27, we can beat the strategy of buying low on
the first trading day and selling high later.
Let’s test this code with other company data. As we show in table 11.2, this strategy
worked four out of five times using the best parameters. Again, there are some uncer-
tainties. If on the first trading day—when the algorithm needs to purchase shares—
the share prices were at a peak but were at a low on the selling day, we might have a
distorted result. 
 An SMA crossover strategy doesn’t beat the baseline for every asset. It’s also essen-
tial to highlight that, depending on the brokers we use, we might need to adjust the
transaction costs per order. One parameter that we haven’t touched at all is taxation.
Every time you sell, you create capital appreciation, which can be taxable depending
on your residency.Listing 11.3 Executing multiple backtests
Table 11.1 The results of various SMA crossover strategies for 10 years of NVIDIA historical 
share prices
SMA low window SMA high window Gains ($)
90 120 309,821.27
100 110 301,097.67
60 160 300,504.11
50 110 298,242.05"
50 180 297,201.84"

287 11.3 Trading algorithms
NOTE If you prefer to code less, you might look at platforms such as World-
Quant BRAIN. These platforms often provide data and a scripting language
to define alpha candidates based on logic, such as our if statements in the
code. Users can also trigger automated backtests. For some, their approach
looks like shooting with cannons at data. From a pool of potential candidates,
select well-defined buy and sell conditions and test them until you find condi-
tions that have been successful in the past. Compute or license costs may
apply when using these platforms.
In the next section, we’ll also address another detail that can affect the outcome of
these backtests. In these backtests, we buy using the close price, but the question is
the price we might get. Stock prices are volatile during the day, and there’s always a
spread between the ask and bid price, meaning we might not get the theoretically
best price. 
 In the next section, we’ll explore how to buy and sell stocks at a minimum price
using limit orders. Before we go into the details of orders, let’s close the topic of algo-
rithmic trading by looking into complex rules.
11.3.2 Complex trading signals
To illustrate basic algorithmic trading, we used an SMA crossover strategy to find prof-
itable trading signals. Let’s explore alternative trading signals to decide whether to
buy or sell shares.
 We use two clauses in our Python code to decide whether to buy or sell shares. If
we replace if row[f"sma_{lower}"]  > row[f"sma_{upper}"]  with a method isBuy-
Signal(args) , and exchange the clause to sell in the same way, we can host a more com-
plex logic to evaluate buy and sell decisions.
 We can screen data for trading signals daily or even in a shorter time. These signals
don’t have to be related directly to the company whose shares we trade. We might also
evaluate indicators that indicate geopolitical challenges (e.g., if a president announces
another round of tariffs, we might be inclined to sell assets that would be affected by
it). Let’s define quantifiable trading signals as method declarations as reference
examples. These trading signals can also be combined with technical indicators
such as the SMA:Table 11.2 The results of running the backtests with shares of some companies
Ticker Lower SMA Upper SMA Gain ($) To beat
KO 100 110 664 1,042
MMM 120 190 810 310
PFE 110 180 1243.55 312.55
AAPL 160 170 10,136.21 9258.81
MSFT 80 140 10,240.63 9514.61

288 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
def price_movement_score(assets:  list)  #—If the assets in the parameters
move positively, return a buy signal; otherwise, return a sell signal.
def keyword_score(channels:  list,  keywords:  list,  upper,  lower)  #—If the
score surpasses the upper threshold, buy; if it’s below the lower threshold, sell.
def insider_score()  #—This calculates a score based on insider trades (insti-
tutional investors or executives of a company buying or selling shares).
NOTE Investors trading with cryptocurrency can group cryptocurrency own-
ers by the number of tokens they hold as the blockchain is a public data
source that identifies holders with an ID. If traders who own a lot of tokens
unstake them, they are likely to sell them, which can be a strong sell signal.
We can collect and combine multiple scores from signals such as the preceding exam-
ples via a scorecard for decision-making. The precondition for each score is that it’s
quantifiable and comparable with earlier results.
We can experiment with different signal combinations and use backtesting algorithms
to see which combination of signals leads to the best results. Of course, we can also
collect the signals in an analytical data set, each signal represented in a column, and
using historical data, we can run supervised ML algorithms to train the model for
good trading strategies. As mentioned, ML algorithms have a high risk of overfitting,
and past results don’t always guarantee future results.
CAUTION Traders need to be aware of potential costs during trading. Slippage
is the difference between where the computer signaled the entry and exit for
a trade and where actual clients, with actual money, entered and exited the
market using the computer’s signals. In addition, transaction costs might add
up if we have frequent orders, and we must never forget that there’s a spread
for each trade.
We can increase the complexity by using parameters other than trading signals. For
instance, we can adjust the number of shares to trade based on decision parameters. IfComparable parameters and historical data
Using natural language processing, we can create sentiment scores for keywords
from text we collect from different sources. We can use a web crawler or APIs to col-
lect the content. Therefore, we can also determine how moods change if we keep
parsing the same sources over time. What yields a result one day can yield one
another day as well.
However, media sources change over time. We might even lose access to some and
gain access to new ones. The challenge is that the pool from which we collect data
changes over time; therefore, comparing new results with past results will be more
complex.

289 11.4 Orders
we have a higher risk tolerance, we can allow leverage to buy shares, meaning we
would borrow money to execute a transaction and use short-sell strategies.
 Entering advanced trading strategies using algorithms can be compared to enter-
ing professional boxing and the ability to challenge every fighter without restric-
tions. With a lot of training, you can win fights and get rich. But otherwise, if you
end up a bold lightweight amateur boxer challenging a heavyweight champion, you
can have regrets.
11.4 Orders
Let’s examine orders, as we want to trigger orders automatically using Python. We’ll
first discuss the difference between exchanges and brokers, and then we’ll explore the
two brokers’ APIs.
11.4.1 Exchanges vs. brokers
Figure 11.4 outlines what we’ve learned so far. Exchanges sell assets. With direct access
to an exchange, we can purchase from the source. However, we usually need a broker
to execute orders and hold our shares in the stock and bond markets. A stockbroker is
an intermediary between investors and exchanges.
Stockbrokers differ by the number of exchanges they support. They will likely support
popular US exchanges such as the NYSE or NASDAQ. Most will also support other
popular exchanges such as the DAX, London, or Nikkei. But what about emerging
markets? Not every broker supports every stock exchange from every country. Condi-
tions might differ for each exchange, which includes data actuality (some data is pro-
vided with delays) and fees.
 A crypto exchange differs fundamentally from a stock market exchange. For exam-
ple, following are some characteristics of a stock market exchange:
Stock market exchanges are highly regulated marketplaces where investors buy
and sell shares of public companies.Brokerage
BuyerBuyerBuyer
SellerSellerSellerExchange
BuyerBuyerBuyer
SellerSellerSeller
Figure 11.4 On an exchange, sellers and buyers can interact directly. A broker is an entity between a 
buyer and a seller. A broker usually facilitates trading on one or more exchanges.

290 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
A public company is listed on a primary stock exchange. For example, NVIDIA
is listed on the NASDAQ in the United States, which is regulated by the Securi-
ties and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Companies may also be traded on secondary stock exchanges—for instance,
NVIDIA shares can be traded on Frankfurt/Xetra—but investors globally can
trust that NVIDIA must comply with US regulations and undergo independent
audits required by its primary listing.
In contrast, crypto exchanges  are mostly private companies, often incorporated in tax
havens or jurisdictions with light financial oversight. As a result, individual govern-
ments typically can’t enforce the same regulatory protections as they do for public
companies. Investor protection is weak: users may have little legal recourse if an
exchange misuses customer funds or fails to maintain proper accounting.
 Some countries require crypto exchanges to establish local legal entities to serve
their citizens (e.g., within the European Union or Japan), introducing a degree of
governance and investor protection. However, the risk remains high, particularly for
global exchanges that operate in lightly regulated environments. Many investors have
lost substantial funds by trusting unregulated platforms or chasing speculative gains.
 The core function of a crypto exchange is to provide an online platform that
enables the trading of cryptocurrencies. Their APIs handle the following:
Placing and matching trades
Storing digital assets (custody)
Signing transactions on the underlying blockchains of each supported crypto-
currency
Unlike public company stocks, which are listed on a limited number of exchanges,
cryptocurrencies are typically available on most major crypto exchanges. This makes
them globally liquid but also subject to fragmented regulation and varying levels of
operational quality.
High-frequency trading
High-frequency trading (HFT)  uses algorithms and advanced technology to execute a
high volume of trades in fractions of a second, profiting from small price inefficiencies
or arbitrage opportunities. If done right, a trader can benefit from tiny price move-
ments and liquidity provisions repeated thousands of times daily. The success
depends a lot on the sophistication of the algorithms, the low-latency infrastructure,
and the co-location near stock exchanges. There’s a constant operational risk.
You might be fascinated with technology, so it can be helpful to know that HFT exists.
However, getting involved in this form of trading also means upgrading infrastructure.
Even Python libraries might be too slow to outperform competitors.

291 11.4 Orders
11.4.2 Order modifiers
Think of the market as an asynchronous system where tasks are queued. You select the
execution logic by creating an order object and submitting it. The parameters you
pass to that object, such as asking for immediate execution or execution at a specific
price, might adjust the performance.
 In this section, we look at order types and order modalities, giving you more
insights into executing orders so they meet your investment goals. Let’s start with
order types.
ORDER TYPES
Orders can be categorized based on their execution triggers, as described in table 11.3.
We can either execute them at once or at a specific price.
Table 11.3 Different order types when buying or selling assets
Order type Description
Market order A market order is the “just do it now” approach. It tells a system to buy or sell immedi-
ately at the current market price. If we had to shape it into a method, we would use a 
signature such as executeTradeImmediately(ticker,  amount). We pass the 
ticker and the amount to the system, and the transaction will be executed next.
Limit order Sometimes, we prefer an order to be executed if a price reaches a certain level. This 
is the domain of the limit order. In a code analogy, we can see it as executeTrade-
When(price  <= targetPrice):  If the price reaches the target price threshold, 
execute the trade.
Stop order Stop orders, also known as stop-loss orders, help to manage risks. You can create stop 
orders to protect yourself against losses. They trigger a market order when a price falls 
below a given level. Translated to code, it would be a method such as triggerTrade-
When(price  <= stopPrice) .
Imagine you hold shares at $100 and are afraid that a catalyst may hit the market and 
your stock may plummet. If you make a stop-loss order at $90, your stocks will automat-
ically be sold when they fall below $90.
Stop-limit 
orderA stop-limit order triggers a limit order when a price is reached. As a combination of 
stop and limit orders, we can define this method as follows: triggerLimitTrade-
WhenPriceBetween(limitPrice,  stopPrice) .
This order carries a risk that the market may move too quickly, leaving your position 
unsold. Imagine, like in the stop order example, you hold $100. You can make a stop-
limit order with a limit price of $89 and a stop price of $90. If the falls from $91 directly 
to $88, the sell order wouldn’t be triggered in a stop-limit order. If then the price went up 
again to $89.50, the order would be triggered.
Trailing stop Like a self-adjusting algorithm, this order type follows the stock’s price movement by a 
set margin. If the stock price rises, the stop price adjusts; if the stock falls by a set 
amount, the order is triggered: adjustStopPriceDynamically(trailAmount) .
If the price rises, the stop price moves up. If it drops $5 from the peak, it sells.

292 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
ORDER MODALITIES
Order modalities are parameters for executing orders, as described in table 11.4.
They can be parameters for every order type introduced earlier.
11.4.3 Executing orders
Let’s use Python APIs to execute orders using Interactive Brokers and Alpaca. We
examined both brokers in chapter 6, so we won’t explain them again here.
INTERACTIVE  BROKERS
In chapter 6, we mentioned that we needed to start a local application called the
Trader Workstation to use a Python API for Interactive Brokers. The Python API con-
nects to this workstation and executes read operations through this application. We
can also buy and sell shares through this connection. The following snippet shows the
code to connect to the Interactive Broker’s Trader Workstation app:
from ib_insync import *
util.startLoop()
ib = IB()
ib.connect()
Let’s execute orders after connecting to the platform. In the following code, we must
pass the parameters about the stock we want to look at to create a contract object:
import pandas as pd
def get_data(market_data):
    print(f"Market Data: {market_data.ask}")
    print(f"askSize: {market_data.askSize}")
    print(f"marketPrice: {market_data.marketPrice()}")
    print(f"marketPrice: {market_data.time}")
contract_apple = Stock("AAPL", "SMART", "USD")
market_data = ib.reqMktData(contract_apple)
get_data(market_data)Table 11.4 Order modalities for order types
Order modality Description
Fill or kill (FOK) When you’ve bought shares in the past, you might have observed that not all 
orders are fulfilled at once. Sometimes, you have more than one transaction. The 
FOK order ensures that the entire order is fulfilled immediately or gets aborted.
Good ’til canceled 
(GTC)Orders are usually only valid during a trading day. An order submitted with the GTC 
modality stays active until it’s executed or canceled manually. GTC orders are 
especially valuable for stop-loss orders. Combining a stop-loss order with a GTC 
ensures that you never go below a certain point, protecting yourself from the 
effects of a market crash.
GTC doesn’t mean “forever.” Different brokers set different time limits until a GTC 
order expires. These expiration time frames are usually between 0 and 90 days after 
investors placed the orders. Be sure to explore the modalities of your brokers.

293 11.4 Orders
After that, we collect the market data for the shares. The market data also contains the
ask price we must pay to purchase the asset. Remember, there’s always a tiny spread
between ask (buying) and bid (selling) prices, as this is how brokers make money.
 Finally, it’s also possible to place market orders. Brokers execute market orders
using the current market price. Some investors believe that market orders are fine
when you need to be fast and expect the price to only go in one direction:
order = MarketOrder(action = "BUY", totalQuantity = 1)
trade = ib.placeOrder(contract_apple, order)
A limit order allows an investor to define a minimum cost to buy or sell. In the follow-
ing code, we execute a limit order with a price of $200. Suppose an investor believes
that a share price will fluctuate during the day. In that case, it’s often recommended
not to buy at the first possible opportunity but rather to buy at a price that is likely to
be good during the trading day:
order = LimitOrder(action = "BUY", totalQuantity = 1, lmtPrice = 200)
trade = ib.placeOrder(contract, order)
One detail of how Interactive Brokers tries to differentiate itself from many other bro-
kers is the number of exchanges this broker supports. As a user of Interactive Brokers,
you need to be aware that there are also paid subscriptions for premium services. For
some markets, you’ll get delayed data without these premium services.
ALPACA
In chapter 6, we introduced Alpaca as a broker. This broker is developer-friendly and
has good APIs. We set the client up using the following code to get an object repre-
senting your trading account:
from alpaca.trading.client import TradingClient
from alpaca.trading.requests import GetAssetsRequest
k = get_secret("broker.alpaca.key")
s = get_secret("broker.alpaca.secret")
trading_client = TradingClient(k, s, paper=True)
account = trading_client.get_account()
Before we start trading, let’s parse tradable assets on this platform. The following snip-
pets define search parameters to look for US equity on the NASDAQ exchange whose
status is active:
from alpaca.trading.enums import AssetClass, AssetExchange, AssetStatus
search_params = GetAssetsRequest(asset_class=AssetClass.US_EQUITY, 
   exchange=AssetExchange.NASDAQ, status=AssetStatus.ACTIVE)
assets = trading_client.get_all_assets(search_params)
print(f"{len(assets)} found")

294 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
Depending on the execution time, you might get different results. When writing this
book, this method returns 4,772 tradable stocks.
NOTE In this code, we use the parameter paper=True . This setting means that
t r a d e s  a r e  e x e c u t e d  i n  A l p a c a  o n l y  o n  p a p e r .  I f  y o u  w e r e  t o  r e m o v e  t h i s
parameter, you would trade for real.
Let’s find out if a specific stock is tradable by obtaining an asset from the client and
then calling the method tradable  (when writing this book, NuScale Power Corpora-
tion [SMR] was tradable):
trading_asset = trading_client.get_asset("SMR")
if trading_asset.tradable:
    print(f'We can trade {asset}.')
To be able to buy shares, let’s find out how much we have to pay per share by getting
the asking price. The ask_price  is a variable of an object that the client returns:
from alpaca.data import StockHistoricalDataClient
from alpaca.data.requests import StockLatestQuoteRequest
stock_client = StockHistoricalDataClient(k, s)
quote = StockLatestQuoteRequest(symbol_or_symbols="SMR")
latest_multisymbol_quotes = stock_client.get_stock_latest_quote(quote)
latest_ask_price = latest_multisymbol_quotes[symbol].ask_price
print(latest_ask_price)
Let’s look at how to execute a market order to buy or sell an asset at the market price.
In the following snippet, we execute it as a FOK as specified with the parameter
time_in_force :
from alpaca.trading.requests import OrderRequest
from alpaca.trading.enums import OrderSide, TimeInForce, OrderType
order_request = OrderRequest(
                   symbol="SMR",
                   qty = 2,
                   side = OrderSide.BUY,
                   type = OrderType.MARKET,
                   time_in_force = TimeInForce.FOK
                   )
new_order  = trading_client.submit_order(
               order_data=order_request
              )
We can also trigger limit orders using Alpaca, which allows an investor to set a mini-
mum price for buying or selling. In the following snippet, we add a time_in_force
parameter that validates this order until it’s executed or canceled by the user:

295 Summary
from alpaca.trading.requests import LimitOrderRequest
limit_order_data = LimitOrderRequest(
                    symbol="SMR",
                    limit_price=8,
                    notional=2,
                    side=OrderSide.BUY,
                    time_in_force=TimeInForce.GTC
                   )
limit_order = trading_client.submit_order(
                order_data=limit_order_data
Summary
The efficient market theory assumes that we can’t beat the market because the
price results from all the information available to investors.
Nonfinancial data can be an untapped resource for learning details about assets
that other investors don’t yet know. It can contain hidden information to beat
the market.
Data such as media, geolocation data, demographics, or trends might tell you
much about additional insights that can be added as factors to a model.
Nonfinancial data isn’t as openly available as financial data, which must be
reported for public companies. However, you can purchase access to nonfinan-
cial data on some marketplaces.
A catalyst in equity markets is something that propels the price of a stock dra-
matically up or down. Catalysts include mergers and acquisitions (M&A), bank-
ruptcy filings, earnings calls, disasters, and interest rate changes.
M&A means that two companies join forces. Such a big event often creates bigger
movements in share prices. Being able to predict successful M&As can be rewarding.
Bankruptcy is also a profit opportunity if existing shareholders panic and sell
their shares too fast. However, it’s a considerable risk to bet on a bankrupt com-
pany’s turnaround. If a stalking horse agreement (a buyer’s commitment to buy
the resources at a minimum price if an auction doesn’t yield a higher price) is
in place, risks are lower.
Every publicly traded company has quarterly earnings calls, during which the
executives report on the company’s performance. Missing or surpassing the
earnings estimates can cause substantial shifts in stock prices.
Disasters, such as wars and natural catastrophes, affect share prices. Some com-
panies make more profits when disasters happen. Buying shares of them at the
beginning of a calamity or selling them before a disaster ends can be a strategy
to make profits.
The Federal Reserve interest (or its equivalent in other countries) defines the
interest rate at which it lends money to borrowers. Capital-intensive companies—
those that need more external investments to be successful—are more affected
by interest rate changes.

296 CHAPTER  11 Algorithmic trading
Investing in low-priced capital-intensive companies can be beneficial before the
Fed reduces the rate. However, some capital-intensive companies face bank-
ruptcy risks if the interest rates are high.
You can define algorithmic trading strategies, which you define when you buy
and when you sell.
Backtesting is a way to test buy and sell the strategies you created by validating
them using historical data.
Even if your backtesting strategy is successful, past results don’t guarantee future
results.
A simple moving average (SMA) crossover strategy extracts buy and sell signals
based on two SMAs with different time windows. SMA crossover strategies don’t
always return better results than “buy low and sell high” strategies.
We can add more complex rules to evaluate buy-and-sell decisions in algo-
rithms. Factors are the criteria we might consider for decision-making.
While we can use Python to program trading algorithms and backtest them, some
platforms offer this as a service so that customers don’t need coding experience.
A trader buys assets through a broker, who will purchase them from an exchange.
Brokers hold assets in the name of a holder.
A trader can buy crypto assets directly from an exchange.
Exchanges and brokers charge commissions per order.
A market order is to be transacted immediately at the current price.
A limit order is an order executed at a specific price. The order is canceled if
the price isn’t reached during a trading day.
A stop order triggers an order when the share price exceeds a defined stop price.
A stop limit triggers an order executed when the share price is between a mini-
mum (limit price) and a maximum (stop price).
A trailing stop order adjusts the stop price. It moves with the market price and
is triggered by sharp changes.
Fill or kill (FOK) is a parameter that determines whether an entire order is exe-
cuted. The broker won’t execute the order in parts.
Good ’til canceled (GTC) is a parameter for an order that doesn’t expire. The
person who created it can either execute or cancel it. Some brokers will still
mark GTC orders as expired if they aren’t executed over an extended period.
If you set a stop order with a GTC, you can prevent yourself from significant
losses when the market collapses.

297Private equity:
Investing in start-ups
Many programmers contemplate starting a start-up at some point. Even if you
haven’t considered creating one, you’ve likely had friends who have. Ambitious
development teams can produce impressive products with minimal up-front costs,
especially when working without salaries, but eventually, finances become a critical
topic of discussion.
 Working purely for equity, however, isn’t always enough to create a product.
Some team members require immediate cash flow to meet living expenses, so sala-
ries or invoicing for their contributions is necessary. While cloud providers may
offer attractive starter packages, they typically don’t provide unlimited free resources.
Additionally, acquiring and servicing clients incurs extra costs.This chapter covers
Investing in start-ups
Seeing a start-up’s evolution from pre-seed 
to Series C
Comparing venture funds, angel syndicates, 
and sovereign wealth funds
Addressing valuation, dilution, and scoring

298 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
 In this chapter, we turn the tables for those of you considering launching a start-
up. Rather than examining start-ups from a programmer’s perspective—focused on
attracting investors and meeting their expectations—we’ll adopt the investor’s view-
point, assessing start-ups from a top-down, scenario-based approach. By investing
money in a start-up, an investor receives a portion of the company in return, com-
monly referred to as equity. As this ownership isn’t traded on a public market like a
stock exchange, ownership in a start-up is referred to as private equity. Let’s delve into
how investors evaluate opportunities in private equity that comes from investing
money in a start-up.
12.1 From idea to initial public offering
Investors have developed a model that illustrates the growth of start-ups, beginning
with pre-seed and seed funding and progressing through various stages of develop-
ment until an initial public offering (IPO). Each stage has specific challenges based
on the start-up’s evolution. Let’s explore these phases. The goal of the subsequent sec-
tions is to view them from an investor’s perspective and highlight the differences from
a founder’s perspective.
12.1.1 The first minimum viable product (pre-seed)
Imagine your friend Fred finally decides to take the plunge. He’s been discussing his
start-up idea for months, and now he’s ready to create a minimum viable product
(MVP)  to validate it. Fred is committed to programming the backend and business
logic, while his cofounder, Lin, a seasoned corporate professional like him, focuses
on the frontend.
 Neither expects a salary, but they have genuine expenses—such as cloud services,
marketing, and sales—that they don’t want to shoulder alone. They reached out to
family and potential investors. The investors declined, citing high risk, but family
members contributed enough to assist with some of the costs.
 Now, you meet them and pose the critical questions: How much cash do you need
to advance your MVP? And more importantly, what’s in it for me if I provide you with
at least part of the necessary funds?
 If you recognize the potential in Fred and Lin’s start-up ideas, you may have a self-
serving reason to invest. In 1981, a venture capitalist invested $1 million in a company
for a 10% stake in the equity. This company went public in March 1986. Today, that
investment would be worth billions of dollars. The company was Microsoft.
 Of course, nobody can predict that Fred and Lin will step into the shoes of Bill
Gates and Paul Allen, but let’s consider a scenario. What if you invested $10,000 for a
10% equity stake, and later someone else invested millions for an additional 10%? Even
if Fred and Lin were “just” acquired in five years, this check could transform into life-
changing wealth. This is the fundamental power of early-stage investing—recognizing
potential before the world does. But before you write that check, let’s discuss how to
evaluate such opportunities.

299 12.1 From idea to initial public offering
At the pre-seed stage, personal relationships frequently influence investment deci-
sions. Founders typically approach friends and family first, not only for financial sup-
port but also for their endorsement of the vision.
 Your perception of the founders plays a crucial role in shaping your understanding
of them. Maybe you see Fred as a dreamer who has frequently misjudged situations.
You know he has a family and can’t just quit his job. How long can he sustain working
nights before reality forces him to give up? Or maybe Fred is that rare genius who can
make anything happen—the person you’d regret not backing.
 Additionally, the perception of the start-up’s business model can differ if you’re an
investor rather than a founder. As a founder, you’re naturally more likely to be biased.
You may have seen a market from the perspective of someone who has the desire to
create something. Regardless, if you want to get rich or change the world, exploring
your idea is different from exploring someone else’s. You can be hooked on a “why.”
Perhaps as a founder, you believe in your start-up because you see your development
skills as superior to others, or you believe in a yearlong observation that gradually
completes a puzzle into a full picture of what the world needs. As an investor, you have
a different perspective. Your focus is likely on the business model. The first question
isn’t how to create a product—it’s how likely your investment will gain value. YourDon’t mistake pre-seed start-ups for lottery tickets
For pre-seed start-ups, it’s tempting to take the easy route when asked for invest-
ment. Consider this typical response:
Instead of investing money, I’d rather contribute my time and advice. No worries,
I don’t expect a payment, but if I land a client and help with the basics, maybe
you can throw some equity my way?
Now, let’s reframe this. Imagine you buy an old house that needs serious renova-
tions. A friend offers to help but wants 10% ownership in return. Or, another analogy,
you have a baby, and another friend offers occasional babysitting, expecting to be
named a godparent.
When approached for pre-seed investments, offering advice or minimal efforts for
equity is like trying to buy a lottery ticket. The chances of betting on a unicorn are as
low as winning the jackpot, but it still feels tempting to try one’s luck occasionally.
The problem is that it just doesn’t work this way.
Start-ups demand full commitment. To be part of the journey, you need skin in the
game —either capital or sustained, mission-critical effort. The latter is tricky to mea-
sure: one friend might work for months and contribute nothing valuable, while another
might deliver a game-changing feature in a day.
Money, however, is clear-cut. The size of their checks easily compares to investors’
contributions. Everyone understands the risk—if the start-up fails, the investor loses
money. That risk justifies compensation. But expecting a meaningful stake simply for
offering occasional advice? That’s wishful thinking.

300 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
observation is narrower on questions such as network effects, scalability, and revenue
growth opportunities, so you don’t need to worry as much about the details to get
there. If you were a founder before and then became an investor, you’ll likely be sur-
prised at how your focus changes.
 Pre-seed investment is the ultimate high-risk, high-reward game. In many cases, it’s
just enough cash to get the founders started. Sure, if your start-up founder turns out
to be the next Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, or Jeff Bezos, your small check could be life-
changing. But statistically, the odds aren’t in your favor.
 Most of the time, you’ll never see that money again. So, the real question is this:
Are you betting on a vision or just funding a friend’s expensive hobby?
The reality of first start-ups and incubators 
If you’re young and working on your first start-up, the odds are stacked against you.
Most first-time founders fail. Many investors consider a founder’s track record of fail-
ures a badge of experience. Failure isn’t just common—it’s expected.
This is where incubators come in. An incubator program is designed to help founders
turn an idea into a viable business. They provide office space, mentorship, and
resources to help young, ambitious teams “incubate” their start-ups.
A typical incubator welcomes all kinds of founders—some with promising ideas and
others who will soon realize their idea isn’t viable or that start-up life isn’t for them.
Over a few intensive weeks or months, start-ups experience highs and lows, set-
backs, and breakthroughs. However, the harsh reality is that most incubated start-
ups will still fail.
Incubators aren’t free to run. They require funding, which can come from multiple
sources:
Government grants and public funding —Governments often provide financing
for incubators to stimulate innovation.
Corporate sponsorships —Large companies sponsor incubators to stay close to
innovation.
Universities and research institutions —Many incubators are affiliated with uni-
versities, helping students commercialize their research.
Venture capitalists and angel investors —Some incubators are backed by inves-
tors looking for early-stage deal flow.
Membership and service fees —Some incubators charge start-ups for participation.
Equity stakes —Many incubators take a small equity percentage in exchange
for resources.
For founders, an incubator can be an invaluable learning experience. But for inves-
tors? Backing incubator-stage start-ups is a high-risk game—one that requires
patience, deep pockets, or a willingness to lose money in search of the next big suc-
cess story.

301 12.1 From idea to initial public offering
12.1.2 Validating the business model (seed)
Imagine receiving an invitation to join the panel to judge the final presentations of an
incubation program. You find yourself among experienced investors, many of whom
have business backgrounds rather than technical ones. If you had looked at their
LinkedIn profiles, you would have noticed a common theme—advisory roles, connec-
tions with influential leaders, and proud mentions of their experiences with Fortune
100 companies. They speak a different language from the programmers you’re used
to. They throw around terms such as venture growth , highlighting their speaking
engagements and subtly (or not) displaying their networks.
 The event begins. One by one, start-ups pitch their ideas, following a format that
has been drilled into them by their mentors. They know they must discuss TAM, SAM,
and SOM (see the NOTE box), as well as other metrics that investors expect to hear.
Some pitches are promising, some are uninspiring, and some are downright painful
to watch.
NOTE TAM, SAM, and SOM aren’t long-lost relatives of Donald Duck. The
total addressable market (TAM) represents the global potential market for a
product, whereas the serviceable available market (SAM) refers to the audi-
ence the product could reach. A serviceable obtainable market (SOM) is the
portion of the addressable market that a business is likely to own. One chal-
lenge for investors is often the speculative nature of the numbers that start-up
founders provide, which typically lack supporting evidence.
Now, the tables have turned. Founders are trying to impress you, and suddenly, you see
things in a different light. Before you asked angels for investment, you had all the
questions other angels might have had about your start-up.
The pitch
The first presenter focuses solely on himself. His team consists of a group of people
executing his vision. He believes he has built something amazing and is passionate
about his product. But what if you gave him a substantial amount of money? Would
his arrogance drive the team away? If no one challenges him, would he crash and
burn his one-person show?
Another team takes the stage, but its pitch is filled with uncertainty. Their voices rise
at the end of every sentence as if they constantly question themselves. There’s ner-
vous laughter, hesitation, and zero confidence. Imagine Rocky Balboa’s victory
pose—then picture the exact opposite. That’s them. Deep down, they don’t believe
they deserve investment, and you can feel it.
Another founder tries to tell an elaborate story but loses the audience within the first
minute. Even the incubator instructors look confused. You watch, waiting for clarity,
but it never comes. At the end of the pitch, you still have no idea what the product
does or who the customers are. Trying too hard to be impressive often backfires.

302 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
At the pre-seed stage, investments are often made by personal friends, family, and
close connections who believe in a founder’s vision. At the seed stage, the interactions
are almost exclusively business-related. Investors want traction, real customers, and a
scalable business model. Seed-stage start-ups need the following:
First customers to validate demand
First hires to expand capacity
Proof that an MVP can be replicated at scale
At this point, investors aren’t just betting on an idea—they’re assessing whether
emerging businesses can grow into something big.(continued)
Then comes a team that nails its pitch. Their business model makes sense, the mar-
ket is there, and their growth strategy is solid. This could work. If it goes viral, they
could acquire thousands of customers overnight. But then they demo the product,
and as an engineer, you can tell right away that they still have a long way to go to
have even an MVP. The vision is there, but can they execute?
This is the reality of incubator-stage start-ups. Many won’t make it past this stage.
Some have potential but still lack key elements. A few might have paying custom-
ers—real validation—but they still need to prove they can scale their operations
effectively.
From an investor’s point of view, you need to make up your mind fast. You invest not
just in a product but also in people. And even if you shortlist two or three out of an
incubator’s cohort, you still need to decide if you want to risk the money you would
give them. 
Accelerator 
You’re not in a seed phase unless you’ve built an MVP and proven serious about turn-
ing it into a reality. One of the most significant differences between pre-seed and
seed is formal incorporation. You may still operate informally at the pre-seed stage
with no formal legal entity in place. However, once you reach the seed stage—espe-
cially if you want to invoice clients—you need to establish a company. Incorporation
is no longer optional, whether it’s an LLC, C-Corp, or another structure.
For many founders, the seed phase is a turning point. Should you quit your day job?
If you haven’t already, now is the time to decide whether to commit to a full-time role.
The seed stage is, therefore, not just about getting investment—it’s about speed.
You don’t want to waste months dragging out an acceleration program or endless
fundraising while working a day job. You need to move fast to do the following:
Start acquiring real customers
Prove that your early-stage product gets attention in the market
Scale operations to a point where more significant investors take you seriously

303 12.1 From idea to initial public offering
12.1.3 Scaling a start-up: The shift to institutional investment
As a start-up grows, the risk of failure decreases, but at the same time, the funding
requirements increase. While individual investors can still back pre-seed and seed
rounds, later-stage start-ups require institutional investors to fuel their growth.
 Once past the early stages, founders want to focus on their business, but raising
money is an art. It requires access to a network of high-net-worth individuals, venture
capital (VC) firms, and investment institutions specializing in scaling start-ups.
 You might attract investors without going through an investment firm if you’re
already a known celebrity or industry leader. But for most start-ups, funding isn’t just
about the money—it’s about the network, expertise, and structured investment pro-
cess that firms provide. Investment firms aren’t just check-writers; they act as agents
for the start-up, helping with the following:
Legal and accounting aspects —Ensuring investments are appropriately structured
and booked
Business strategy —Connecting start-ups with the right talent, advisors, and partners
Future fundraising —Laying the groundwork for later-stage funding rounds
Start-ups follow distinct funding stages, each with a different focus. Let’s look at
them next.
SERIES A: S CALING  THE BUSINESS  MODEL
The company has not only hired employees but also acquired its first customers,
learning how to manage them and continuously provide value. The focus is on refin-
ing the business model and scaling the product.
 For founders, this is a crucial phase. They must work a lot, and there’s still a con-
siderable risk of failure; most likely, the big VC firms aren’t yet interested in you. Most
Series A companies aren’t profitable yet. Investors prioritize growth over profits at this
stage. Companies with a higher burn rate—spending their investments more quickly—
are especially pressured to advance to the next stage rapidly.
SERIES B: S CALING  OPERATIONS  AND MARKET  EXPANSION
The start-up has a solid foundation and proven business model. The leaders shift their
focus to expanding into new markets and optimizing monetization. The company’s
style is evolving. From founders who do everything, the start-up establishes hierarchies
and responsibilities.
 However, working in a Series B start-up is still demanding. You have more precise
goals and more apparent competitive strategies because you’ve discovered what worksWhen you have paying customers and a plan to scale further, you’re no longer just
“working on a start-up idea”—you’re running a business. Investors now look at your
traction, execution speed, and ability to scale. The question isn’t “Is this a great
idea?” but “Is this a company that can grow fast and generate returns?”

304 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
in the market and what doesn’t. You also know your real competitors on the market,
and you need to incentivize your team to work hard to stay ahead.
 Investors still prioritize growth, but managing burn rate has become increasingly
critical. Investors still accept that the company isn’t yet profitable, but they expect to
see a clear path to profitability.
SERIES C: M ARKET  DOMINATION  AND ACQUISITIONS
When you reach Series C, you should have a stable niche in the market and be
regarded as a key player there. In some exceptional cases, especially when your
start-up is in a blue ocean market, being a market leader is the key to becoming a
unicorn.
 The company aims to expand internationally, enhance its technology, and acquire
other start-ups. However, the primary goal is still a successful exit. In that case, an exit
means that an industry giant acquires the start-up or the start-up goes public through
an IPO, which means it becomes a publicly traded company and is listed on the stock
market. Investors will benefit significantly from this, as their investment has been suc-
cessful, and they can reap the rewards.
12.1.4 Exits: The final transition
For many developers, discussing start-ups with venture capitalists or serial entrepre-
neurs can be a valuable and eye-opening experience. Unlike traditional businesses
that grow organically, start-ups backed by investors are built with an exit in mind
from day one. The term exit is often thrown around, but it can mean different
things:
A high-profile acquisition by a larger company
An IPO that lists the start-up’s shares on a public exchange
A smaller-scale acquisition that occurs when another company acquires a start-up
A shutdown, which technically is still an exit
A successful exit is selling the company at a profit or transferring ownership to
become a publicly traded company. Commonly, every founder celebrates every form
of exit, but the successful ones do so more extensively. An exit means that you’ve
started a business and ended it. A shutdown without an acquisition or a fire sale of the
start-up is, strictly speaking, an unsuccessful exit, and investors will lose money. How-
ever, from a different perspective, taking the risk and becoming a founder is a strong
commitment, and many factors—including pure luck—influence how a company will
ultimately exit. Therefore, unsuccessful exits—some founders may use the term suc-
cessfully failed —can be a badge of honor for founders. Many investors will value found-
ers who have had only unsuccessful exits more than first-time founders who haven’t
had any exits. Table 12.1 summarizes the four types of exits, along with a reference
scenario, to help us understand what was happening.
 

305 12.1 From idea to initial public offering
But why is an exit so important? Investing in private equity means locking up money
for years. Unlike stocks, which can be sold at any time, VC investments are typically
illiquid. Investors take extreme risks, and many start-ups fail. Therefore, when a start-
up exits successfully, the returns must be substantial to compensate for the failures
and inflation. This explains the pressure for speed. For founders, it’s essential to
understand why hardly any venture capitalist wants to invest in a company that is grow-
ing slowly and is already profitable. After all, the dividends are small, and a return on
investment over many years isn’t what they have signed up for. A company with slow
growth expectations doesn’t attract the attention of buyers.
 If a start-up has no viable business model—something that is often unknown in
advance—investors want to fail it quickly so they can refocus their attention on those
start-ups with a viable business model. Investors who have enjoyed collaborating with
the founding team that reached a later stage might even tell the founders to bring a
new horse instead of riding a dead one. A fail-fast culture demands that time be mini-
mized to achieve results and, in some cases, that we be able to try again soon.
 From an investor’s point of view, if you want to get into VC, you need to shift your
mindset. You need to ask different questions, such as these:
Who has acquired similar start-ups before?
Who would buy this start-up? (Can this company become attractive to Google,
Amazon, Microsoft, Meta, or another giant?)
Is the start-up building something that fills a real gap that someone will want
once it has scaled?
Is the team valuable?
The last item highlights another practice, known as acqui-hire . Some investors might
understand that your start-up won’t be the one that builds a product to become aTable 12.1 Types of exits (successful and unsuccessful)
Exit Reference scenario Returns
IPO Company A is a Series C company. After long talks and planning with investment 
bankers, they finally announce their IPO. After the IPO, an investor can trade his 
ownership on the stock market. High
Acquisition Company B is sold to an industry giant for billions. Direct investors are paid out 
and make a huge profit. Limited partners (LPs) get their profits minus carry fee 
and their initial investment paid out.High
Fire sale Company C is a company in distress but can sell itself to another company. 
Unlike a successful acquisition, in a fire sale, the buyer’s investment is largely 
to pay off debts. The investors won’t receive their full investment back.Partial
Shutdown Company D is a company in distress but shut down. Unlike in the fire sale, no 
company wants to acquire the company. Maybe some equipment, such as com-
puters and office equipment, can be liquidated, but investors will likely not 
receive any money.None

306 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
market leader. However, at the same time, they recognize an immense shortage of
qualified engineers, and a large company may pay millions to secure top engineers on
its payroll.
NOTE Often, it doesn’t require building a highly profitable start-up, but
rather solutions that can become highly profitable in the right hands. For
some companies, a start-up with a solid product and capable engineers in a
future market, such as quantum computing, can be highly valuable even if it
generates no profits.
12.2 Investment vehicles
First, let’s ask the maybe most fundamental question when deciding whether to invest
in start-ups: If you have money, why bet on such a risky venture as start-ups? Blue-chip
stocks and diversified exchange-traded funds (ETFs) provide steady growth, divi-
dends, and low risk. And as we’ve seen in this book, you can hardly go wrong with an
index fund. After all, there’s a high chance that you’ll lose your entire investment in a
start-up if it fails (and statistics indicate that 90% of them do).
A deeper dive into private equity
Private equity refers to investments in privately held companies. While start-ups are
the primary focus of private equity investments, investors may also invest in estab-
lished, private businesses that aren’t start-ups. The goal of private equity invest-
ments is to acquire a significant stake in target companies, transform them, and
benefit from the resulting value increase. The company’s ownership is defined in the
cap table, which outlines the owners and their shares. 
Suppose a company is successful and consequently more highly valued than before.
The value of private equity shares usually grows far more in percentage than those
invested in large public companies. One reason can relate to the efficient market the-
ory. While the markets have extensive information about public companies, new pri-
vate companies are largely unknown to investors, and this means their information
can’t yet be priced.
High rewards come with high risks. If a start-up fails, the money invested is likely
gone. Valuation and your eventual return are vague for a long time. Critics see private
equity as a form of high and illiquid investment, meaning, unlike stocks in a public
company, you can’t sell your stocks at any time for a relatively predictable price. So,
why do it if you can achieve relatively safe gains by keeping your money in a 10-year
index fund?
While institutional investors have, of course, learned to manage risks, for private
investors, the primary motivation is often finding the one outlier in a batch of start-
ups that are otherwise doomed to fail within the next two to three years. Everything
is rooted in the same confidence in buying public stock—you believe you see some-
thing others don’t see.

307 12.2 Investment vehicles
Microsoft went public on March 13, 1986, for $21 per share. Through a stock split,
that single share would now be equivalent to 288 shares. As of January 31, 2024, one
share purchased at the IPO would be worth nearly $120,000. But if you had invested
in Microsoft before it went public, you would get one share for even less than $21, and
you can calculate many scenarios of how much money you could have made by being
one of the first investors in such a company.
 Someone needs to bring the next Microsoft to the stock exchange. If we imagine
that all venture capitalists disappeared overnight, there would be no new businesses in
the market to challenge the status quo. The countrywide innovation cycle would slow
down because talented individuals with great ideas would no longer receive funding.
A short window of opportunity often exists to launch a new concept in the market. If
you’re too slow, the opportunity is lost. There’s no way innovation at scale can exist
without VC.
Overall, we understand that if we find a future unicorn—a start-up valued at over a bil-
lion dollars—there is likely no other investment category in the world that offers
returns comparable to those of an investment in a unicorn. For some angels, search-
ing for potentially strong early-stage start-ups may still feel like playing the lottery, but
the industry has evolved. Angels often form syndicates to evaluate promising start-ups
together, thereby reducing their overall risk of failure. Increasingly, public funds are
available for early-stage start-ups as countries recognize that this investment can yield
significant returns. Even if founders can’t use the pre-seed or seed funding received
from a sovereign fund or public investment program, young engineers who strive for
success learn valuable lessons along the way, enhancing their worth in the job market.Innovation and corporate business
Google acquired YouTube in 2005, and Meta acquired WhatsApp in 2014. A fair
question is why don’t these cash-rich companies build these solutions themselves?
Given their talent and funding, wouldn’t developing a new messenger or video-sharing
platform in-house be easier?
The reality is that many R&D teams of companies focus on refining existing products
rather than developing new ones that might disrupt their market. But there’s also a
practical reason: if only 1 in 100 start-ups manages to be exceptional, an industry
giant with superior resources might improve those odds—but even if 5 out of 100
start-ups build stunning products, the company still wastes significant resources.
Cash may not even be the constraint, but engineering talent is.
Moreover, corporate engineers often prioritize work-life balance. A start-up demands
relentless dedication—something an internal team may struggle to match. Frequently,
the founder’s commitment to creating something extraordinary can’t be matched by
any salary. So, while billion-dollar acquisitions might seem extravagant, they often
make financial sense when you run the numbers.

308 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
They may outperform their peers when entering a corporate job with their skills. Let’s
examine the investment vehicles in detail.
12.2.1 Venture capital
Venture capitalists typically focus on start-ups in later stages—Series A, B, and beyond—
where risks are lower and returns are still high. However, there are exceptions, such as
incubators affiliated with elite universities, where the chances of discovering the next
unicorn are significantly higher.
 When discussing top-tier venture capitalists, specific names dominate the market,
including Sequoia, Andreessen Horowitz (aka AH Capital Management, LLC, or
a16z), Accel, Benchmark, Tiger Global, SoftBank, and many more. Be aware that
smaller, emerging venture funds are also available.
 Let’s say you have a five- or six-digit investment amount in your account and want
to get in on the next WhatsApp-style deal. Why not simply contact one of these ven-
ture capitalists and secure a position? Bad news: it doesn’t work that way.
 VCs primarily work with institutional investors, including pension funds, sovereign
wealth funds, university endowments, and ultra-high-net-worth individuals (e.g., bil-
lionaires, rather than retail investors). If you’re a billionaire, exceptions might be
made. Otherwise, they won’t take your call.
 The good news is that fund managers run VC funds for large private investors. So,
you might not call Sequoia directly and tell them you have some bucks to spare for
one specific company, but you can look for pooled investments and find someone who
collects investments from wealthy private investors. The minimum investment size is
typically $100,000 or more, and it can sometimes exceed millions. There’s an annual
management fee, most are about 2%. There’s a carry fee of 20%, which is a fee that is
only paid on profits. If your investment generates $100,000 in profits, $20,000 is allo-
cated to the venture capitalist. You receive the remaining $80,000, minus the initial
investment and management fees. Figure 12.1 illustrates this flow of money in a sim-
plified fashion. Remember that every fund will have more limited partners (LPs); in
most cases, a fund invests in multiple start-ups. You should also be aware that more
than one fund can invest in the same start-up.
 Venture funds invest in multiple start-ups in parallel. Some of these companies will
be in Series C rounds. Every fund manager will ensure that the founders make a sub-
stantial commitment to an exit. After all, fund managers will be pressured by inves-
tors, who want to see results for their 2% annual management fees. In most cases,
investors will encounter some exits along the way, as the fund typically contains multi-
ple start-ups.
 
 

309 12.2 Investment vehicles
12.2.2 Angel networks
Investing in VC funds requires a substantial amount of capital. But what do you do if
you can’t afford the minimum ticket size? Does this imply that your chances of invest-
ing in a unicorn are slim unless you engage with them during the pre-seed and seed
funding stages before institutional investors are on board?
 While later-stage start-ups require significantly higher investments, it’s still possible
to invest in them even with a smaller wallet. Angel investors can form a syndicate. In a
syndicate, a seasoned lead investor identifies a start-up opportunity. The syndicate
negotiates the terms and determines the amount of capital to raise from LPs.
 Angel investors don’t have the same reach as established venture capitalists, who
often have access to start-up incubators located near elite universities. They can rarely
pool investors into a fund. However, angel investors often have a strong network and
frequently collaborate with serial investors who cofound start-ups.
NOTE One typical network of angels is a diaspora from a particular country.
For example, Armenia has a vast diaspora, especially in California. Many Arme-
nians living in the United States with accumulated capital are attracted to invest
in start-ups where the founders are in Armenia. This way, they can combine two
things: making money and helping the country they originated from.
So, let’s say an angel has negotiated a deal with a start-up in which he wants to invest.
The angel might be willing to invest $10,000, $50,000, or $100,000. However, a start-
up needs more than that. The angel negotiates a deal with the start-up. The parame-
ters of this deal include the desired check size, the timing of when the money is
needed, and the amount of equity the investing entity would receive for that money.Fund
Manager2% AnnualFee
IPO Event
TriggeredStart-UpInvestment
Limited Partner20% Carry Fee
80% Exit Return+
Remaining
Investment (If Left)Total Exit ReturnPayment
in Tranches
Figure 12.1 In the simplified money flow, 80% of the profits and your investment, minus 
the annual fees, will be returned to you.

310 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
 The angel negotiating the deal connects with other angels through a network to
become a lead investor in a jointly established Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) . An SPV is a
legal entity, typically an LLC, created for a specific investment purpose. In VC, SPVs
pool multiple investors into a single entity to invest in a start-up. Instead of each LP
appearing on the start-up’s cap table, the SPV is the only investor listed, simplifying legal
and administrative processes. Therefore, the lead investor’s role is to act as an agent (see
figure 12.2). He provides capital to the start-up and must manage all the formalities
associated with it.
Investors who join the SPV are referred to as LPs within that SPV. Being an LP in the
SPV means that, as an individual, you don’t own equity in the start-up, but you do have
a stake in the SPV. The SPV will be listed in the start-up cap table.
 You can search for companies on platforms such as AngelList as an individual
investor. You can also reach out to other angels on platforms such as LinkedIn. Angel
investors often create a one-pager summarizing the investment opportunity. In this
one-pager, you’ll find a summary of the company and its value proposition. You’ll
learn about their story, what made them successful, who the leaders are, and what they
want to achieve. The one-pager will outline economic moats and active users, as well
as share insights about the management team.
 Sometimes, if you approach angels, this one-pager looks more like a sales pitch.
The angel list will share details about earlier investment rounds, as they will want to
demonstrate that you’re not the first to believe in the start-up. The goal is typically an
acquisition or an IPO, and the angel syndicate will share success stories of how an
industry giant acquired a similar start-up with a comparable product in the past. This
suggests that a successful exit can result in billions.
 Like a VC, a syndicate looks for a minimum check size. If you exceed this size, you
typically increase it in 10k steps. Each round has a closing, meaning the opportunity is
gone if you decide too late.
 A lead investor, who bears most of the work and expenses to set up the deal, needs
to earn a return on their investment. In a VC, you have an annual management fee of
Lead InvestorSVP
Cap Table
Limited PartnerLimited Partner
Figure 12.2 A lead investor’s job is to represent all investors when forming an SVP that will 
be registered on a start-up’s cap table.

311 12.2 Investment vehicles
2%. However, with an investment in a single start-up, a yearly charge can become a
challenge. Imagine that this start-up needs many years to go public, paying 2% inter-
est nibbles away at much of your investment yearly. For this reason, syndicates often
request a one-time payment. This can be around a $7,000 one-time pro rata charge.
These charges cover all the expenses of a lead investor, as they also need to incur
costs for contracts, travel expenses, and other related expenses to finalize the deal.
Rarely is everything done with a quick online call; creating an agreement takes time
and experience.
 A lead investor who creates a syndicate wants to benefit from the start-up’s success.
As with venture capitalists, a lead investor often requests a carry fee of 20%. The same
rules apply as with VCs in that a carry fee is a charge on profits—no profit, no charge.
12.2.3 Sovereign wealth funds
Some countries’ leaders establish Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs), state-owned invest-
ment funds that manage national wealth. Typically, these funds are sourced from gov-
ernment surpluses, revenues from commodities (e.g., oil, gas, and minerals), or
foreign exchange reserves.
 These funds can be valuable resources for start-ups. A country lacking natural
resources requires investments to establish a start-up ecosystem that can compete
internationally. Alternatively, consider petrostates that derive their wealth from oil
and gas. These nations often seek to diversify their income sources, as the profits from
oil and gas are inevitably finite.
 Like VCs, it’s rare for individual investors to contribute to an SWF. However, many
SWFs focus on developing a start-up ecosystem. You can explore start-ups createdFounders
There is a thought experiment commonly attributed to Warren Buffett, which he pre-
sented to his students. Imagine you could choose a classmate and receive 50% of
that person’s future earnings for the rest of your life. Warren Buffett also flipped the
questions and asked students to short (bet against) a different classmate, meaning
they would have to pay 50% of that person’s future earnings. Who would they pick,
and why?
This thought experiment can be perfectly attributed to investing in start-ups. Most of
what start-ups eventually achieve depends on their founders. If you’re required to put
skin in the game, you must also ponder what makes someone successful. It might
not be intelligence, but traits such as work ethic, integrity, leadership, and resilience.
Some go even further. They say that founders aren’t just something to invest in when
evaluating a start-up, but the key thing. Ultimately, these founders present a busi-
ness model that will make the venture valuable. Perhaps whenever an investor met
Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, Jeff Bezos, and other successful founders, it was hard to say
if their ideas would truly bear fruit, as, at that time, nobody knew if personal comput-
ers, operating systems, or e-commerce platforms would be successful on the market.

312 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
through an SWF and engage where it makes sense. From an investor’s point of view,
you can explore which ecosystems sovereign funds invest in and if you can contribute
as well.
12.3 Assessing start-ups
Some investment decisions follow gut feelings. A charismatic and energized founder
who is determined to do something great can be a decisive factor for an investment
decision. After all, a saying goes that you invest as much in people as in the product.
And as the start-ups have no history, and founders can’t guarantee that their ideas will
be successful, how else can we decide but based on instinct?
 However, there are various ways to use programming to make educated decisions.
We look at some of them in this section.
12.3.1 Valuation
Valuing start-ups is different from valuing established companies. Traditional valua-
tion methods, such as price-to-earnings (P/E) ratios or Enterprise Value (EV), rely on
stable cash flows and profits. However, many start-ups aren’t yet profitable and may
have negative cash flow. Instead, investors rely on methods such as:
Comparable company analysis (CCA) —Comparing similar start-ups’ valuations
Precedent transactions —Looking at past acquisitions of similar companies
VC method —Estimating exit value based on expected returns
Discounted cash flow (DCF) —Projecting future cash flows based on present value
None of these methods can be used out of the box. We can’t apply the CCA method
unless we have data on enough start-ups. Using expected returns as a basis is a risky
approach. Almost every founder claims impressive figures, and without a critical
review, start-ups might be overvalued. Due diligence can be expensive and compli-
cated, as start-ups often lack the sophisticated accounting standards and accounting
history of established companies.
 While the DCF appears to be the most reliable method, we must still be aware that
revenue growth is uncertain, and we continue to face high burn rates and variable
expenses. In addition, in the early stages, the business models are often unproven. If
it’s still unclear how a company generates its revenue, how can we accurately forecast
its future cash flow?
NOTE Some start-ups try to do something utterly different, unlike anything
that exists on the market. Consider geoengineering solutions to reverse cli-
mate change, which involve partly experimental approaches. While such cases
require somewhat speculative models, investors still can define business mod-
els and estimate potential revenues. They add a markup for the risks of the
idea not working.
Despite these challenges, DCF can provide a structured approach to estimating a start-
up’s intrinsic value. Start-ups typically face high early-stage risk, so discount rates often

313 12.3 Assessing start-ups
range from 20% to 50%, which is significantly higher than those used for established
businesses.
 Let’s build a DCF model in Python, assuming a start-up expects to grow its revenue
and eventually reach positive cash flow. We need to set up some assumptions:
Revenue grows at 30% annually.
Expenses reduce over time as the start-up scales (10%).
Terminal value accounts for the long-term value after Year 5.
The discount rate is 40%, which means you reduce this percentage from the
final value to cover the risks.
The cash flow is calculated yearly as revenue minus expenses. Let’s look at listing 12.1
for the DCF. We first define the assumptions. Then, we use these inputs to project
future earnings and return the results.
import numpy as np
years = 5                     
initial_revenue = 500_000     
growth_rate = 0.3             
initial_expense = 700_000     
expense_reduction = 0.1       
discount_rate = 0.4           
cash_flows = []                                          
for t in range(1, years + 1):
    revenue = initial_revenue * (1 + growth_rate) ** t   
    expense = initial_expense * 
               (1 - expense_reduction) ** t              
    cash_flow = revenue - expense                        
    cash_flows.append(cash_flow)                         
terminal_growth_rate = 0.05                     
terminal_value = cash_flows[-1] * 
                 (1 + terminal_growth_rate) / 
                 (discount_rate – 
                  terminal_growth_rate)         
discounted_cash_flows = [
cf / (1 + discount_rate) ** (t+1) 
for t, cf in enumerate(cash_flows)]               
discounted_terminal_value = terminal_value / (
1 + discount_rate
) ** years                                        
startup_valuation = sum(
discounted_cash_flows
) + discounted_terminal_value                     
print(f"Estimated Startup Valuation: ${startup_valuation:,.2f}")Listing 12.1 DCF using Python
Sets the assumption, such as Forecast period, 
Initial revenue ($), 30% annual growth, Initial 
expense ($), Expenses decrease by 10% per 
year, High discount rate due to risk (40%)
Calculates future 
cash flow
Terminal value using the 
perpetuity growth model 
with a long-term 5% 
growth assumption
Discounts cash 
flows to present 
value

314 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
Unfortunately, inputting some numbers and receiving a precise number doesn’t
always work. Formulas can become more complex than that. People may negotiate
about the parameters. Some might argue that because a specific start-up operates in a
high-risk industry, it should have a higher discount rate. Others might say that some
figures in the planning documents are too speculative to yield substantial results.
 In general, it’s difficult to quantify all possible risks. What if the principal founder
leaves? What if a corporate giant suddenly brings a similar product to the market?
What if there are macroeconomic shifts or unexpected tariffs that affect the world
economy?
 For many early-stage start-ups, valuation is merely a means to assign a numerical
value to a company. Every founder wants to impress others with good numbers. As
hardly anyone will acquire an early-stage start-up, nobody denies founders the right to
boast about their creativity in front of other founders.
 When a start-up seeks to raise money and negotiations with investors begin, the val-
uation serves as a baseline for further discussion. Then, the market will decide what
investors are ready to spend.
12.3.2 Dilution
Start-ups can raise multiple funding rounds at each stage of development. They can
raise money through debt (borrowing money) or equity (selling ownership). Raising
money through equity leads to dilution : preexisting owners will own fewer shares after
an investment round unless they participate in the investment round themselves.
 A founding round doesn’t mean the value of an earlier round decreases; if the
company’s overall value increases, it also means that the value per share is increasing.
After all, they use this money to enter new markets and acquire new clients. Let’s out-
line this in a simplified scenario:
1Fred and Lin started a company and issued 1,000,000 shares, with a 50/50 split.
2An investor offers $500,000 for 25% of the company in a seed round.
3To give the investor 25% equity, the company issues 333,333 new shares,
increasing the total number of shares to 1,333,333.
4Fred and Lin successfully acquire clients with this capital, increasing their over-
all valuation and the value per share.
Mark Zuckerberg started Facebook with 100% ownership. By the time of its IPO in
2012, his stake was just over 28%. Despite dilution, Facebook was worth $104 billion at
the IPO, making Zuckerberg’s ownership worth billions. Dilution isn’t always bad—
owning a smaller percentage of a highly valuable company is often better than owning
100% of a struggling one. Let’s use sample data to model dilution across multiple
funding rounds in Python.
NOTE Some founders almost sabotage themselves with the idea that if they
sell shares of their company, they will lose control over the product. If a
founder is passionate about their product and expects a vision to be created

315 12.3 Assessing start-ups
in all the details as they imagine it, they might risk failure. Successful found-
ers are deeply passionate about their business model.
Start-ups can’t treat funding rounds as an infinite moneymaking machine. Not only
do owners’ stakes decrease, but investors who buy themselves in want to see a business
that increases its earnings and is on the trajectory to profitability without requiring
constant new investment rounds.
 Let’s look at listing 12.2, which shows dilution. We use artificial data to demon-
strate how the ownership percentage decreases.
import pandas as pd
total_shares = 1_000_000            
founder_shares = 500_000            
funding_rounds = [
    ("Seed", 500_000, 25),          
    ("Series A", 2_000_000, 20),    
    ("Series B", 10_000_000, 15),   
    ("Series C", 50_000_000, 10)    
]
dilution_data = []
for round_name, investment, equity_given in funding_rounds:
    new_shares = (total_shares * 
                 (equity_given / 
                  (100 - equity_given)))                    
    total_shares += new_shares                              
    founder_ownership = (founder_shares / 
                         total_shares) * 100                
    dilution_data.append([round_name, 
                          investment, 
                          int(total_shares), 
                          round(founder_ownership, 2)])     
df = pd.DataFrame(dilution_data, 
                  columns=["Round", "Investment ($)", "Total Shares", 
"Founder Ownership (%)"])
df
This sample illustrates that with each subsequent funding round, the total number of
shares increases, while founder ownership decreases. Even though dilution happens,
the start-up raises millions, fueling growth. Earlier investors and founders will own less
over time, but their shares will be worth more.Listing 12.2 Calculating dilution
Sets parameters 
ownership details, 
funding rounds
Calculates 
dilution

316 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
12.3.3 Scoring
Statistics indicate that only a small percentage of start-ups survive. As this book is
about investing for programmers, and investing in start-ups is part of a comprehensive
investment strategy, the question arises whether we can use programming skills to
determine which start-up has a better chance of survival.
 The smaller the start-up, the lower the chances of gaining significant insights
through financial valuation. Let’s see if we can score start-ups through nonfinancial
parameters as well.
 The following subsections list the potential factors to consider in this evaluation.
Some of the insights we can get through large language models (LLMs). Other data is
also available from platforms such as LinkedIn or Crunchbase. In the following cate-
gories, we describe the insights that can be obtained and outline the possible steps a
programmer can take to retrieve the information.
INCUBATOR  AND ACCELERATOR
Each incubator or accelerator has a success rate. The more start-ups originating from
them succeed, the better. Investors who narrow their search parameters only to inte-
grate successful incubators or accelerators increase their chances of success. They
might focus on start-up programs affiliated with elite universities. We can ask LLMs to
provide us with a list of successful incubators and accelerators and use this informa-
tion as weighted model parameters.
FOUNDERS  AND ADVISORS
We can profile start-up founders and score them on various parameters. We can exam-
ine their overall experience in the businesses for which they plan to create their next
start-up, and review where they studied and with whom they have previously worked.
We’re also interested in their experience as founders and would like to know if they
have had exits before. 
 We can gather a wealth of information about founders on LinkedIn or other plat-
forms that contain data on professional achievements. We can also see if skills are
missing in a founder team. It’s also helpful to examine the company’s advisors. In
many cases, advisors with a solid track record on boards are a good sign.
EXISTING  INVESTORS
If we know who has already invested in that company, we can build a scorecard by rat-
ing the existing investors based on their success rate. Platforms such as Crunchbase
provide data on start-ups and their investors. Based on this, we can develop a scoring
system that incorporates certain parameters, for example, the volume of past invest-
ments. We then score investors based on factors such as size, success rates, and other
similar criteria.
CLIENTS  AND STRATEGIC  PARTNERSHIPS
If we know who their clients are, we can also forecast potential growth scenarios for start-
ups. In many cases, collecting data about client collaborations would require access to
confidential contracts, making it a topic of negotiation rather than a technical one.

317 12.3 Assessing start-ups
 Often, start-ups form strategic partnerships to expand and market their products.
If a start-up collaborates with a major player in its field, this adds value. Still, both cli-
ent relations and strategic partnerships are complex to rate, as many aspects are chal-
lenging to measure because various contracts and other documents related to
collaborations may not contain commitments from both sides, but rather statements
of intention.
COUNTRY  OF ORIGIN
Unicorns get their name because they are rare. Some countries attempt to breed uni-
corns, while others are less invested in this endeavor. You can look up the number of
unicorns by country and the number of unicorns per million people. Countries such
as Israel, for instance, do well.
 There’s a catch if you look for “start-up nations.” Some start-up teams may origi-
nate from one country but incorporate in another due to tax reasons and access to
markets. It’s no surprise that many founders of Delaware C corporations aren’t US
residents. Still, knowing the country of origin of a start-up team can be one item on
a scorecard.
DOMAIN
Trends that dictate the focus of start-ups often depend on technological break-
throughs. In the early 2000s, numerous innovations enabled the creation of more
advanced web pages, which we later referred to as Web 2.0. Start-up teams that were
capable of adopting these technologies faster than their competitors had the potential
to become hugely successful.
 Following the release of the iPhone, numerous companies emerged to develop
mobile apps. At the time of writing this book, if you look up start-up ideas, hardly any-
one would recommend that you build apps. Now, the world is seeking innovations in
quantum computing, AI, nuclear energy, improved storage technologies, and carbon
capture. The times of consumer apps are over.
 Domains can also be scored by risk. Think of domains in the early stages, such as
geoengineering, in which you look for large-scale interventions to fix the climate or
new nuclear reactor types. If companies in risky fields succeed, the rewards are higher.
REGULATION
Think of two categories of start-ups: a biotech company that researches new mRNA
vaccines and an IT company that builds a new messenger platform that incorporates
AI. We don’t need to guess which of these two start-ups will face heavy regulation and
which one won’t. More regulations mean more risk.
ECONOMIC  MOAT
Let’s stick with the example from the previous subsection and imagine the biotech
company is successful, creating a new type of vaccine. Who faces more risks through
competition? The IT company that builds a new messenger platform doesn’t have
much room to defend itself from competitors. If a new start-up creates a better mes-
senger platform, it might still fail. However, a successful biotech start-up, which has

318 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
likely patented its products that contributed to its success, can’t be easily displaced
from its success by a competitor. An economic moat isn’t always easy to quantify, but
we can evaluate companies within their respective industries and explore various
parameters to assess this key factor.
CAPITAL  INTENSITY  AND BURN RATE
While we stick to our previous example, we can also take them as a reference for capi-
tal intensity and burn rate. The biotech company is likely capital-intensive. A signifi-
cant amount of money is required for a lab and a minimum staff size. They would also
have to spend a considerable amount of money on equipment and likely hire patent
lawyers and officers who are well-versed in regulations, ensuring that all trials run
smoothly. Compare this to IT companies that need budgets for notebooks and some
cloud services to get started. They often need to spend money on licenses, as many
tools are open source.
 Capital intensity is often also expressed using a metric called burn rate , which refers
to the amount a start-up spends in a given period. Start-ups with a high burn rate and
a lengthy path to profitability are inherently risky.
BUSINESS  MODEL
First-time founders might wonder what app to build. Experienced founders may won-
der how to monetize their business model. As investors, we can adopt a more
informed approach to evaluate business models, as our destiny doesn’t depend on
them, which makes it easier to differentiate between the product being created and its
monetization.
NETWORK  EFFECT
Investors such as Peter Thiel view the network effect as essential. Facebook, for
example, is a product that started small and focused on a specific scenario. However,
with a blue ocean market ahead of them, they were able to scale worldwide, as sud-
denly everyone gravitated toward a product that allowed them to present themselves
to the world.
 Perhaps it’s harder today to build a new social media platform, as the market is
already saturated. However, every investor dreams of finding a product that not every-
one has, but where it’s certain that it’s only a matter of time until everyone wants it.
INDIVIDUAL  NORTH STAR METRICS
You can ask a founder the question, “What is the one metric you keep screening and
that will make you smile once it reaches a certain milestone?” For a social media com-
pany, it might be 1 million subscribers. For a company selling products, the customer
acquisition costs might be below x USD.
 Each domain may have a different North Star Metric. If you find these metrics, you
can likely monitor their chance of a breakthrough over time.

319 Summary
Summary
Investing in start-ups may be the riskiest investment, but it can pay off tremen-
dously if the venture is successful.
Some experts in venture capital (VC) say you invest more in people and busi-
ness models, and less in the product.
Start-ups progress through distinct stages, each with specific investment
requirements:
– Pre-seed start-ups often serve as a reference point for founders with an idea
who are working on a minimum viable product (MVP) to demonstrate the
product’s potential.
– Seed start-ups are companies that aim to transform a successful MVP into a
full-fledged product that can be sold to customers.
– Series A companies typically have paying customers; their primary role is to
develop and refine a working product for the mass market or to meet the
advanced requirements of customers.
– Series B companies must retain their existing customers and strive to expand
into new markets.
– Series C companies have gained some market dominance and primarily
strive for a successful exit, typically through an acquisition or an initial public
offering (IPO).
Most founders view unsuccessful exits as badges of honor, which can help
attract more investments.
VC-backed start-ups don’t exist to grow slowly. If a company takes VC, the goal is
to get acquired or go public.
Retail investors can’t directly invest in a prominent VC’s likely next unicorn, but
if you have enough capital, you can still gain exposure to private equity through
VC funds.
There are various start-up valuation methods. DCF values start-ups based on
their future expected cash flows, which are discounted for risk.
Investors and fund managers of a VC firm expect a start-up to work hard toward
achieving an exit.
Angel syndicates are alternatives to VCs and enable investors with smaller check
sizes to invest in start-ups.
A lead investor of an angel syndicate commonly incorporates a special purpose
vehicle (SPV) that, when invested in a start-up, is added to a start-up’s cap table.
VCs don’t just look at DCF; they compare it to market trends and past acquisitions.
Each funding round adds new shares, reducing existing ownership percent-
ages. This is known as dilution, and it’s an inevitable consequence in venture-
backed start-ups.
You can use data and programming skills to score start-ups on nonfinancial
aspects.

320 CHAPTER  12 Private equity: Investing in start-ups
For a scoring model of start-ups, you can explore parameters such as the success
chance based on the incubator/accelerator, founders, existing investors, cli-
ents, strategic partnerships, country of origin, domain, regulations, economic
moats, capital intensity, burn rate, business model, network effect, and individ-
ual North Star Metrics.

321The road goes ever
on and on
Congratulations! You made it this far. In this final chapter, we explore possible next
steps in your journey to use your programming skills to make wise investment deci-
sions. Some of the discussion is about behavioral finance, as managing yourself is
often a central criterion for success. It will complete your view, allowing you to
begin your journey.This chapter covers
Getting advice
Realizing knowledge alone doesn’t make you 
a financial advisor
Being a digital nomad to get you closer to 
financial freedom
Preventing irrational decisions with control 
measures
Seeing index funds as the safest choice 
after all

322 CHAPTER  13 The road goes ever on and on
13.1 Getting advice
Imagine embarking on a journey to a distant country with a different culture, having
prepared for it only by reading books. If you’re a frequent traveler, you know that in
some countries, you’ll encounter situations that no travel guide can prepare you for.
It’s the same with investment. Books don’t provide financial advice on how to deal
with specific situations. Investments are time-sensitive. Even if a writer had a good idea
about a purchase decision at the time of writing, the decision criteria might have
changed when the reader reads that information. This book aims to equip you with
the techniques to assess financial assets. The decision to invest—or not—must ulti-
mately be yours.
 If you’re new to investing, not knowing what you don’t know is a risk. In this book,
we introduced the Dunning-Kruger effect, which underlines that people new to a field
often overestimate their skills. Some new and overconfident investors learn some les-
sons the hard way. The question is whether the hours of frustration and the loss of
money are worth it.
 Learning lessons through low-stakes investing can be a good start. You can invest
only a minimal amount of money in riskier assets to build experience gradually until
you’re ready for bigger stakes. If you’ve never consulted a financial or tax advisor, con-
sider doing so before making significant investments. Ensure that any advisor you
choose has the necessary experience and credentials.
 Additionally, Reddit and other social media platforms are excellent resources for
seeking advice and obtaining a peer review of investment ideas. Just be cautious; some
“experts” on social media, who confidentially recommend you make bold moves to
get rich fast, may be affected by the Dunning-Kruger effect when offering guidance.
Always be aware that there are also many scammers on social media. As usual, the
more people you ask, the more opinions you get, and the more chances you have that
critical thinking helps you develop a good strategy.
 Taxation is another crucial factor that investors shouldn’t ignore. Specific strate-
gies may optimize your returns depending on your citizenship and tax residency. Even
if an investment appears outstanding based on fundamental analysis, tax-efficient
alternatives sometimes offer better overall returns.
 This book explores how large language models (LLMs) can serve as powerful
research assistants. Using LLMs to determine what to ask the human tax consultant
might make sense. However, AI often lacks full context and can make mistakes. If you
provide basic details about your citizenship, tax residency, and income, AI may suggest
strategies you can validate with a professional financial advisor, such as reducing with-
holding taxes.
 Many experts have opinions on how and when AI chatbots replace human advisors
or when the advice of an AI is tough to beat. Remember that AI is trained on data cre-
ated by humans, so it’s likely that some specific strategies you might come up with can
be unique. By building your Retrieval-Augmented Generations (RAGs) with investor-
related information on fields that interest you, optimizing prompts, and using AI

323 13.2 Alpha hunter
agents to orchestrate workflows, you can have one LLM validate the results of other
LLMs. This approach offers no limits to creativity in using AI. And chances are good
that with every new model that is released, you see more sophistication and fewer
hallucinations.
 Some developers who shared their experiences about vibe coding sessions, where
t he y le t  AI  c re ate  c o de , fo und  o ne  b ig be havio r al p ro bl em :  t he y “g et  l azy” t o  s o lve
problems themselves. Instead of examining the code to identify areas for improve-
ment, they write a single prompt, submit it, do something else in the meantime, such
as checking social media, and then check the results. When the AI-generated code
doesn’t work well, they copy and paste the error message and submit another prompt.
Many programmers conclude that they often could have created some solutions faster
if they hadn’t used AI (while also admitting that no human can be faster than any AI
to write code in some situations, so context matters). One AI-related piece of advice is
to beware of falling into the trap of relying on AI for everything. The more advanced
they get, the more tempting it will be.
13.2 Stay curious
In this book, we emphasize the importance of investing in businesses we understand.
One way to become a better investor is to stay curious and learn as much as possible
about companies. Research them, learn about their operations, and speak with people
who have experience with them. Many audiobooks and podcasts explain how the
investment world operates, offering numerous insights that can inform your invest-
ment decisions.
 Sometimes, you meet new people and aren’t sure what to discuss. Take this chance
to learn more about a profession. With that knowledge, you can conduct your
research and gather significant expertise to answer questions from others in a similar
field. One important trait is having active listening skills, which helps make your inter-
view partner feel more comfortable sharing about their work.
13.3 Alpha hunter
After reading this book, you might feel tempted to create alpha portfolios that outper-
form the market and sell your strategies to clients. Before pitching your ideas to
friends and family, consider this: even highly experienced investors with strong finan-
cial backgrounds make mistakes and lose money. Giving direct investment advice can
damage relationships.
 Even if you become skilled at evaluating assets—something we’ve demonstrated
is possible for those with strong analytical abilities—you must face a hard truth:
proving financial success requires effort and time. While you can showcase back-
tested statistics and historical simulations, what truly matters to fund managers,
banks, and clients is whether you have skin in the game. When you demonstrate
consistent performance over the years and explain how you achieved it, serious
investors may start paying attention.

324 CHAPTER  13 The road goes ever on and on
 Regardless of your approach, expect one common question: “With so many estab-
lished investment firms—BlackRock, Berkshire Hathaway, Vanguard—boasting decades
of data and proven strategies, why do you believe you can do better?” If you can’t
deliver a convincing answer that stands up to experts in the field, it’s probably not
time to launch your start-up.
 One alternative to going solo is forming an investment group. Collaborating with
others enables peer reviews, which strengthens your skills and credibility. Additionally,
various platforms enable you to share insights, and some even offer monetization
options, allowing investors to subscribe to your group for a fee.
 If you intend to charge others for financial services, be sure to also review the reg-
ulations in your country. While it’s okay to weigh out the best investment opportuni-
ties among friends, reaching out to potential clients to charge them for your advice is
a business, and this business, in most countries, requires a license. Before attempting
to monetize, always verify the regulations of your local market regarding the require-
ments for being a financial advisor.
13.4 Nomadism
Some readers may approach this book as a step toward achieving financial freedom,
perhaps even as a means to escape the constraints of corporate jobs and pursue a
more fulfilling life. For those living in high-cost countries, digital nomadism can be
a significant milestone on that journey.
 Being a digital nomad isn’t just about exploring new places, meeting people, and
having adventures. It can also mean lowering your living costs and tax burden. As a
programmer, you have the unique advantage of location independence, whether
building your start-up or working with multiple clients remotely.
 As mentioned earlier, consulting a knowledgeable tax advisor can help you deter-
mine whether relocating to a country with a digital nomad program is financially ben-
eficial. Some countries offer attractive tax incentives, including reduced income tax
and capital gains tax, which can make such a move a significant step toward financial
independence.
 However, there are challenges to consider. Your citizenship may affect the ease
with which you can obtain a visa. Many countries with digital nomad programs aim to
protect local businesses from unfair competition, which often means you’re only per-
mitted to work for clients outside your new country of residence.
 Freelancers should also be mindful of corporate policies. While many companies
support remote work, some exclude certain countries as locations for fulfillment. You
sign a contract, try to log in from your notebook on the corporate network, and
you’re suddenly blacklisted because your IP address doesn’t match. You can prevent
that beforehand by ensuring that your client is okay if you work from your new coun-
try of residence.
 While lower living costs and favorable tax rates can be appealing, be aware of the
potential effect of inflation and currency fluctuations. The value of some local currencies

325 13.5 Activist investing
has sharply declined over time, potentially eroding your purchasing power. However,
as you’ve gained some financial literacy in this book, you can also assess the risks by
studying the Forex charts.
 If you’re freelancing, building a strong online presence is essential. Platforms such
as Upwork, Toptal, and LinkedIn can help you showcase your expertise, attract clients,
and establish a sustainable remote career.
 If you plan to work as a remote consultant to earn money as an investor, remem-
ber the basic lessons learned in this book about interest rates. When the interest
rates of a central bank are high, borrowing money is more expensive. Thus, starting
your career as a freelancer is easier when interest rates are low and more projects
are on the market.
13.5 Activist investing
In chapter 2, we noted that younger generations, who have many years ahead of them,
tend to be more concerned about environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
issues than earlier generations. Organizational frameworks, such as diversity, equity,
and inclusion (DEI) or “my country first,” have also gained influence. While some
may prefer to ignore them to avoid painful debates with evangelists of each side, we
must acknowledge that we’re experiencing a growing divide between political stand-
points that may also influence the investment decisions of many individuals and even
organizations.
 Many consumers are value-driven and don’t purchase products from companies
that fail to share their ethical concerns. But what about investment? Most of this book
was about how to increase your wealth through investing. Would you buy shares of a
company you dislike but whose share price growth outlook is excellent? As getting
richer may not be everyone’s top priority, we need to ask the following: Can individual
investors affect a company’s success through their investment decisions? How much
money would a single investor need to invest to influence the fate of a company?
 The financial world has seen activist investors such as Carl Icahn and Bill Ackman,
who buy significant stakes in companies—often 10% or more—to influence board
decisions. However, the average private investor’s equity in firms is usually statistically
insignificant, and they won’t significantly affect corporate strategy, even if they invest
their entire wealth in one company.
 So, unless you’re a billionaire, it’s doubtful that a CEO of the Magnificent Seven
will call you to thank you for your investment. However, as we’ve seen in chapter 12 on
private equity and start-up investment, the smaller a company is, the greater the effect
single investors can have. You might face a dilemma though even if you acquire
enough shares to push for change in a company for ethical reasons. Suppose the com-
pany profits significantly from controversial, but legal, actions. If you become a lead-
ing investor and get a seat on the board, you can change the business approach.
However, investing in a company to cut its primary income is akin to climbing a large
tree to cut off the branch you’re sitting on.

326 CHAPTER  13 The road goes ever on and on
 Perhaps only the ultra-wealthy have the privilege of investing in groundbreaking
technologies that can reshape industries. But, as societal values evolve, ethical invest-
ing may become an increasingly powerful force that shapes markets in ways we’re only
beginning to understand.
 In his Yale Financial Markets course, Professor Robert F. Shiller indicated that
investors may have a moral duty to improve their environment. As you become more
prosperous, you should become more invested in philanthropic projects. However, if
changing the world is your ultimate goal, remember that some entrepreneurs have
taken it too far, committing fraud in the name of effective altruism. Never forget that
investing is a business first. You need to excel at it if you hope to make even a slight
change in the world.
13.6 Measures of control
Whether you follow this book’s advice to stay cautious or take a more aggressive
approach, you may eventually invest significant money in assets. In one extreme sce-
nario, you experience rapid gains, fueling confidence and leading you to start plan-
ning your early retirement. However, overconfidence often leads to costly mistakes.
Countless books warn about cognitive biases and market risks, yet some investors
downplay them, investing  heavily  without considering the potential downside. You may
think you’re brighter than others and ignore all the warnings. When reality strikes,
the consequences can be severe. Imagine someone who quits their job, declaring
themselves financially free, only to face unexpected losses. In extreme cases, they may
find themselves returning to their former employer and asking HR to reverse their
resignation to stay financially afloat.
13.6.1 Checks and balances
Minor miscalculations can compound into significant problems. One way to mitigate
these risks is by implementing checks and balances  in your decision-making process. 
 One example of checks and balances comes in the form of peer reviews . Discussing
strategies with experienced investors who can challenge your views can provide valu-
able insights. Some investors often feel compelled to make investments quickly
because they fear that an opportunity will pass. Some refer to this as FOMO, or the
fear of missing out. Still, often it makes sense to wait with a buy order. Meet with a
friend and explain why you want to buy the shares. The more you need to justify
your actions with arguments, the more you’ll discover if you’re on to something.
The more you engage with brilliant, critical thinkers who offer different perspec-
tives, the better equipped you’ll be to make sound financial decisions and avoid
costly pitfalls.
 Another practical approach is conducting regular retrospectives  to assess past invest-
ment decisions and refine future strategies. For that, you need to write down why you
invested in an asset. Then, you continue to review your decision, and even after you’ve
sold your asset, you may still refer to your notes. Sometimes, you might have to accept

327 13.6 Measures of control
that you must learn a lesson to improve. But this again means that you likely pre-
vented yourself from making a mistake twice.
 One practice that many investors do is to document everything. We may refer to
this as an investment diary. For every decision they make, they document the exact
reasons for doing so and the associated expectations. If they review their choices a few
months or years later, they can reassess the situation and apply the lessons learned.
Based on these learnings, many investors follow principles and strict rule sets for their
investment decisions.
13.6.2 Gain distance
Some investors take a thoughtful approach, carefully analyzing decisions and consid-
ering long-term outcomes. However, once they invest, they step back and check in
only occasionally to ensure things are on track.
 However, maintaining this level of detachment becomes possible if you own a lim-
ited number of assets. Having an over-diversified portfolio with maybe a hundred
assets or more is a challenge. If you reach a point where you no longer remember why
you invested in a particular company—or worse, if you see a stock ticker in your port-
folio and have to look up what company it belongs to—you may have lost control over
your investments.
 A better strategy is to focus on a manageable number of businesses you understand
well. Investing in companies you can track and evaluate is more effective than clutter-
ing your portfolio with assets that sounded exciting at the time. Simplification leads to
better decision-making and stronger conviction in your investments.
 Another essential part is to not make decisions based on strong emotions. In an
era where you can make investment decisions 24/7 from anywhere, it also means you
can create a buy order at a party while drinking with a friend who shares an outstand-
ing investment opportunity, promising a 10x return because the company is excellent.
A hangover might not be the worst thing you wake up with.
13.6.3 Programmer’s journey
This book is for programmers and data analysts who are new to the world of investing.
It bridges the gap between your technical expertise and financial concepts, showing
you how to apply your analytical skills to achieve better investment outcomes. The
examples provided are intentionally straightforward, allowing you to run them on a
standard notebook or a simple cloud setup.
 For those seeking a greater challenge, your programming skills open the door to
more sophisticated applications in quantitative finance. While this book focuses on
the fundamentals, you can explore advanced models on your own. For instance, you
could experiment with time series forecasting using AutoRegressive Integrated Mov-
ing Average (ARIMA) models or delve into complex quantitative finance theories.
 If you have access to significant computational resources, you might even explore
high-frequency trading (HFT), an area where speed and algorithmic complexity

328 CHAPTER  13 The road goes ever on and on
provide a competitive edge. This field is dominated by hedge funds and specialized
investment firms that dedicate massive resources to forecasting market movements
and executing trades in fractions of a second.
13.6.4 Playing it safe
As a final observation, my conclusion is the same in all my journeys. In discussions
about efficient market theory, many individuals claim to beat the market. Some indi-
viduals brag about staggering results with speculative trades, often backed by “bro
advice” or vague technical analysis.
 Many of these “star traders” have a story about their huge gains, but they won’t tell
you how much they lost on the way. And if you check in years later, often they tell you
that they stopped trading without wanting to give you a reason why.
 At the same time, you read about investors who got rich and where it’s proven
that they beat the market. You might want to study people such as Warren Buffett,
Peter Lynch, and George Soros. Like the book Outliers: The Story of Success  by Mal-
colm Gladwell (Little Brown and Company, 2008), which examines individuals who
excel with extraordinary business performance, you should investigate whether the
same pattern exists.
 Some believe that following principles helps people make the best decisions when
stressed and emotional. Investor Ray Dalio wrote a book, Principle: Life and Work  (Avid
Reader Press, 2017), about this. Many investors spend considerable time researching
their assets. One principle is to make rational decisions and learn from mistakes.
 So m e i ndivi du als  have  b e co m e ri ch in e m er ging  mar ke ts . The  cryp to  m arke t  is
one of them, but consider Russia in the 1990s when the country was effectively up for
grabs. After the collapse of the Soviet Union and the transition to capitalism, the Rus-
sian state rapidly privatized industries through programs such as the “voucher privat-
ization” and “loans-for-shares” schemes. In the chaos, well-connected and often ruthless
businessmen were able to acquire state-owned assets—particularly in natural resources,
energy, and banking—at a fraction of their value. A small group of these individuals
became immensely wealthy and came to be known as Russia’s oligarchs. 
 Investors in emerging markets often face fewer challenges in finding suitable
investment opportunities; however, they must also be cautious to avoid being tricked
or scammed. Emerging markets can be roller-coaster rides. Not everyone is in for the
long ride. Some people want to avoid the stress. One way to do that is to pick an index
or world fund. Select one that is tax-optimized for you and proceed. You spend your
time relaxing and occasionally return to your portfolio.
 In Shiller’s Yale Financial Markets course mentioned earlier, he recommends allo-
cating 80% of your money to index funds and reserving 20% for stocks. Success grows
with an understanding of the business you invest in. If you start there and consistently
outperform the other 80%, you can still adjust the ratio.
 When you do your own research about index funds—or even world funds, that dis-
tribute all the positions on assets worldwide—you’ll also find a lot of other people

329 Summary
giving the same advice: put everything in an index fund, come back in some years,
and you’ll be happy with the results. What an index fund doesn’t do, however, is find
the growth potential in businesses that you understand well and that can outperform
the market, as shown in this book.
 Lastly, ensure that investing doesn’t interfere with your life. You might be off track
if you spend most of your day just tracking prices and watching what goes up or down.
After all, if you strive for freedom by becoming an investment prodigy, remember that
you’re not truly free if the desire to live independently consumes all of your time and
energy. In the end, in the wise words of Gandalf in J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the
Rings , “All we have to decide is what we do with the time that is given to us.”
Summary
Seeking advice before making significant investments is almost always a wise
decision.
Discussing potential investments with a friend and charging clients for your
advice are distinct actions. For the latter, you likely need a business license.
Staying curious about businesses is one way to accumulate a wealth of knowl-
edge, enabling sound investment decisions over time.
Becoming a digital nomad enables you to pick countries with favorable tax con-
ditions. Some countries may not have taxes on capital appreciation.
Become aware that your investment also supports a company. Sometimes, you
might not want to support specific companies, even if you might benefit
financially.
The smaller the company, the more effect your investment has.
You can become your own most significant obstacle to getting rich if you act
irrationally. Establish checks and balances to minimize the effect of strong
emotions.
You can document every investment decision and then later use a retrospective
to find potential learnings to improve your investment process.
Occasionally, it helps to take a step back and reevaluate situations with a clear
mind.
Many investors claim that new investors are best off with an index or world fund.
Patience and a stoic mindset may be the key ingredients to achieving wealth in
the long run.

330appendix
Setting up the environment
Some of you may prefer cloud services, while others of you prefer to use your own
devices. Many programmers are familiar with specific tools to replace the ones
shown in the book, allowing them to choose their final configuration independently.
In this appendix, we list options for each category. We’ll demonstrate how to inte-
grate cloud services, manage source code, select development environments, and
export data.
 To work with financial assets, you’ll need to register with a broker or exchange.
In this book, I’ll demonstrate using Alpaca, Interactive Brokers, and Binance.
You’re free to use other providers, but in that case, you’ll need to handle data
access and integration on your own. Be aware that because these are platforms that
host financial data, they require some extra security procedures such as a Know
Your Customer (KYC) process. Suppose you feel uncomfortable with using a broker
as a backend, or your broker doesn’t support remote access through an API. In that
case, you can always create a small relational database that contains tables with all
your positions.
 This appendix highlights only the basic actions, but doesn’t explain all the
details required for possible environments. For detailed instructions on setting up
a framework or service for your specific environment, do some web research or
consult a large language model (LLM).
A.1 Python
Python is the lingua franca of data analytics. It provides key data structures and fea-
tures to facilitate efficient data analysis. Since its beginnings in the 1990s, Python
has developed a growing library of tools that excel in all aspects of data explora-
tion, including data retrieval and visualization.

331 A.1 Python
 Many operating systems come with a preinstalled Python version. You can use this
Python installation locally or create a virtual environment for your exploration. Most
experts recommend the latter because it allows you to install as many custom libraries
as you want and update each library without risking conflicts with other libraries for
different use cases.
 In this book, we use Python 3.13, the latest version available at the time of writ-
ing. The Python community provides new versions every year. As Python is mature,
functional changes that remove backward compatibility are rare. In most cases, the
exercises should run with slightly older or newer versions of the programming lan-
guage. You can determine your Python version by running the following command
in the console:
Python ––version
If you don’t have a Python interpreter installed, follow the instructions on
www.python.org  to set up your Python environment. You can also check the availabil-
ity of the package manager pip on your system, which allows you to install libraries for
data exploration. For example, you can install these three libraries, which we fre-
quently use in this book, in this way:
pip install yfinance pandas numpy
This book relies heavily on the pandas and matplotlib libraries in most samples. If you
still have a lot to learn about using Python or these two libraries, we recommend
catching up before delving into programming examples.
NOTE Developers can port the code in this book to other languages if they
offer similar libraries to Python. Just don’t underestimate the effort required,
as some libraries, such as a port of yfinance, might not be available for every
language.
We list the libraries used in this book in table A.1. Be aware that for some of these
tools, you need to register on a platform and get API keys.
Table A.1 Python libraries used in this book by chapter
Library Link Chapter Key required
python-dotenv https://pypi.org/project/python-dotenv/ 3N o
yfinance https://pypi.org/project/yfinance/ 3N o
pandas https://pypi.org/project/pandas/ 3N o
NumPy https://pypi.org/project/numpy/ 3N o
matplotlib https://pypi.org/project/matplotlib/ 3N o

332 APPENDIX Setting up the environment
A.2 Secrets manager
The most crucial section of the whole setup is securing API keys and secrets. An unau-
thorized person who gets access to them can cause harm. For that reason, we need to
protect them as much as possible. Listing A.1 uses the python-dotenv library to load
secret keys from a file named .env.
 
 
 finviz https://pypi.org/project/finviz/ 3Y e s
openbb https://pypi.org/project/openbb/ 3Y e s
alpha-vantage https://pypi.org/project/alpha-vantage/ 3Y e s
eodhd https://pypi.org/project/eodhd/ 3Y e s
pytrends https://pypi.org/project/pytrends/ 4N o
Alpaca-py https://pypi.org/project/alpaca-py/ 6Y e s
ib_insync https://pypi.org/project/ib-insync/ 6N o
python_binance https://pypi.org/project/python-binance/ 6Y e s
SQLAlchemy https://pypi.org/project/SQLAlchemy/ 6N o
CurrencyConverter https://pypi.org/project/CurrencyConverter/ 6N o
scikit-learn https://pypi.org/project/scikit-learn/ 8N o
statsmodels https://pypi.org/project/statsmodels/ 8N o
openai https://pypi.org/project/openai/ 8Y e s
google-genai https://pypi.org/project/google-genai/ 8Y e s
google-generativeai https://pypi.org/project/google-generativeai/ 8Y e s
anthropic https://pypi.org/project/anthropic/ 8Y e s
transformers https://pypi.org/project/transformers/ 8N o
langchain https://pypi.org/project/langchain/ 9N o
Langchain-community https://pypi.org/project/langchain-community/ 9N o
Langchain-openai https://pypi.org/project/langchain-openai/ 9Y e s
Langchain-core https://pypi.org/project/langchain-core/ 9N o
mplfinance https://pypi.org/project/mplfinance/ 10 No
streamlit https://pypi.org/project/streamlit/ 10 NoTable A.1 Python libraries used in this book by chapter  (continued)
Library Link Chapter Key required

333 A.3 Source code repository
import os
import requests
from dotenv import load_dotenv
load_dotenv()
NOTION_TOKEN = os.getenv("doc.notion.api")
DATABASE_ID = os.getenv("doc.notion.db")
Suppose the .env file in the directory where the code is executed contains key-value
pairs assigning values to the keys doc.notion.api  and doc.notion.db . In that case,
the library loads the values and later assigns them to variables. We can apply these con-
cepts to all keys that we want to load, including usernames and passwords.
 Be aware that python-dotenv is just a minimum-security measure and helps you to
separate hardcoded API keys from the source code. We can use a secrets manager,
which takes security even one step further. If someone runs code locally on their com-
puter, they can use HashiCorp Vault. In addition, there are custom solutions for each
environment. If you’re using a Mac, take a look at the keyring library. Be sure to invest
some time in exploring the best way to secure your keys as much as possible based on
your environment.
A.3 Source code repository
The choice of a remote git server, such as GitHub or GitLab, doesn’t make a differ-
ence. Both solutions do the job, and deciding which one to use depends on personal
preference.
 While we don’t need to explain to programmers the benefits of a source code
repository, and most programmers will be able to create their own repositories, we
n e e d  t o  h i g h l i g h t  t h e  r i s k  o f  a c c i d e n t a l l y  c o m m i t t i n g  A P I  k e y s  i n  p l a i n  t e x t .  S o m e
remote git repositories offer features to detect if keys are pushed to a server by mis-
take, and you can also use private Git repositories to mitigate the possible impact of
pushing keys by accident. We can’t stress enough that the best protection for your keys
is to prevent them from leaving your secured environment from the beginning.
NOTE When using API keys to trade on financial platforms, it’s always better
to be safe than sorry. If you feel that there’s even the slightest risk that an
unauthorized party could gain access to the keys, change them. All platforms
offer methods to make access keys invalid.
One way to prevent a file from being uploaded to a remote cloud repository is to add
the file names containing the keys, such as the .env file, as shown previously, to the list
of files your source code repository will ignore. A git-add  will check the content of a
.gitignore file and ignore all files and directories that match the patterns specified in
the file.Listing A.1 Using python-dotenv

334 APPENDIX Setting up the environment
A.4 Development environment
In this book, we use Jupyter Notebooks. A Jupyter Notebook is an interactive environ-
ment that executes code in single cells. It can be run in its native environment, Jupy-
ter, or a hosted setup using an Integrated Development Environment (IDE). What
makes Jupyter Notebooks unique is that they provide an interactive environment. You
can execute code in one cell and use the results of earlier executions in a different
cell. This interactivity offers flexibility and is particularly well-suited for research-ori-
ented approaches. Let’s explore some of the typical environments.
A.4.1 Anaconda
Jupyter can be installed as a Python standalone library using the pip package manager.
However, developers can use Jupyter when it’s integrated into a development environ-
ment. Figure A.1 illustrates a Jupyter Notebook running in Anaconda, an open source
data science and AI platform that supports Python and R programming languages.
Anaconda provides an entire environment for data scientists, including the package
manager conda, which follows similar principles to pip. Refer to the installation rou-
tine on the Anaconda web page ( https:/ /mng.bz/Rwoa ).
Figure A.1 A Jupyter Notebook running in Anaconda in a web browser

335 A.4 Development environment
 Many cloud-hosted environments offer notebooks, including AWS Sagemaker, Azure
Machine Learning, Google Colab, and JetBrains Datalore. Developers who don’t want
to install anything in their local environment can use these hosted environments.
A.4.2 Visual Studio Code
Visual Studio Code (VS Code), shown in figure A.2, is a standard IDE that runs on
most operating systems provided by Microsoft. It’s also trendy among Mac and Linux
users because it’s free and offers many functionalities. Download and install VS Code
for your operating system based on the vendor’s instructions at https:/ /mng.bz/15BR .
A.4.3 PyCharm
Many developers prefer PyCharm, an IDE specifically designed for Python program-
mers (figure A.3). PyCharm offers numerous features of interest to Python program-
mers. It’s available in a paid pro edition and a free community edition. The producer
JetBrains also provides other useful developer tools, such as DataGrip, to manage SQL
databases.
 Install PyCharm according to the vendor’s instructions. PyCharm Pro isn’t
required, but it can facilitate some programming activities.
 
 
 
 
Figure A.2 The VS Code environment with Jupyter Notebooks

336 APPENDIX Setting up the environment
A.5 Cloud
This book demonstrates how to access and store financial data using databases and
APIs securely. In the examples, we run data science notebooks on a local system.
Alternatively, you can execute everything in cloud services that allow hosting Jupyter
Notebooks.
 Some programmers shy away from using one of the big cloud providers because
they need to follow a KYC process and provide credit card information for registra-
tion, and not everyone feels comfortable doing this for private projects. For each ser-
vice you use locally, you can replace it with a cloud-based option. Besides options
hosted on large cloud providers, there are likely free versions from smaller providers
that don’t require any credit card information. 
A.5.1 Database
The first item to replace, if you want to get more advanced, is likely the SQLite data-
base we use in this book, which is excellent for explanatory scenarios. For more
advanced scenarios, there are limitations, however. One reference database provider
that allows you to use a simple database setup without a credit card is Supabase.
 We can use all forms of relational databases hosted on cloud providers. Of course,
cloud developers must also be familiar with opening access ports and setting up and
configuring databases in the cloud. Every cloud provider has extensive material on
how to do this.
 This book uses the SQL Alchemy library to read and write database data. A devel-
oper, therefore, only needs to replace the connection string if they want to change the
backend.
Figure A.3 PyCharm with Jupyter Notebooks

337 A.7 LLMs
A.5.2 Cloud secrets managers
Users who use a public cloud can also use the secrets managers provided by these plat-
forms. We can then use these libraries from Python scripts or command-line tools. List-
ing A.2 shows how to use the Boto3 library to access AWS Secrets Manager. Each big
cloud provider has its own secrets management solution. Pick the one you like best.
client = boto3.client('secretsmanager')
try:
    response = client.get_secret_value(SecretId=secret_name)
    secret = json.loads(response['SecretString'])
    return secret
except Exception as e:
    print(f"Error retrieving secret: {e}")
    return None
While the secret manager solutions from public cloud providers are secure, keep in
mind that cloud providers offer more sophisticated features to minimize risks. Cloud
endpoints may, for instance, accept only requests from limited IP ranges if security is
configured accordingly.
A.6 Export and documentation
In this book, we export data to note-taking platforms such as Notion or Google Sheets.
Both frameworks allow export with keys. You can access these services by creating an
account for each of them.
 You can replace these two platforms with all kinds of alternatives. The recommen-
dation is to use a centralized repository to store all research and responses from
LLMs, as this allows you to have a structured study. If you want to reassess a decision
you’ve made some time ago based on an LLM response, you can also use that
response and submit it as part of a prompt to ask an LLM if it still agrees with the orig-
inal assessment.
A.7 LLMs
Ever since LLMs went mainstream in IT, vendors have been racing to release ver-
sioned models to capture market share. We use four LLMs in this book: 
Anthropic
OpenAI
Google Gemini
AdaptLLM/finance-chat
Using frameworks such as LangChain, we unify the API and don’t have to manage
multiple vendor APIs. What we still need to prepare for is generating accounts on the
platforms, obtaining access keys, and occasionally purchasing a minimum number ofListing A.2 Accessing AWS Secret Manager using Boto3

338 APPENDIX Setting up the environment
credits. The detailed process of creating accounts and creating keys is out of this
book’s scope. LLM chatbots typically do a great job explaining how to create an
account on their platform and generate API keys, which can be used in Python.
A.8 Brokers and exchanges
We use brokers for stocks and bonds, and we use exchanges for stocks. Chapter 11
explains the difference between these categories. In this book, we use three platforms
to trade assets and gather data from them:
Interactive Brokers —A long-established international broker with a tremendous
amount of functionality
Alpaca —A developer-first broker with innovative APIs
Binance —A well-known cryptocurrency exchange
As many different brokers and exchanges are available worldwide, we must be aware
that every financial platform requires a KYC process, which requires customers to pro-
vide proof of their identity. This procedure is for your protection as investors. Verified
users who must authenticate to use a system are less likely to attempt fraud.
 While two platforms use API keys to authenticate, Interactive Brokers takes a dif-
ferent approach. Interactive Brokers uses a local installation of a tool called Trader
Workstation (TWS) to connect with a Python API. Sometimes, you need to configure
the API access with the TWS. Interactive Brokers provides information tailored to
your operating system.

339index
A
accelerator, explained 302 –303
accounting 20 –27
balance sheet 25
FCF (free cash flow) 26
income statement 22–25
accredited investors 5
actively managed ETFs 4
activist investing 325
AdaptLLM/finance-chat 
model 207
ADAS (Advanced Driver-Assis-
tance System) 81
ADRs (American Depositary 
Receipts) 71 , 132
AEB (Euronext 
Amsterdam) 132
AI agents 11 , 216
agentic workflows without 
frameworks 222–228
framework for 228–237
requirements 217–222
AI (artificial intelligence) 181
prompt engineering
208–213
alert, price 220
algorithmic trading 273
catalysts 278–282
nonfinancial data 274–278
orders 289–294
Alpaca
extracting data 128
orders 293Alpha Vantage 73
Anaconda 334
analytical investors
programmers as 16–17
risks and rewards 15
angel networks 309 –311
angel or venture capital 
investments 7
annual payout 108
ARIMA (AutoRegressive 
Integrated Moving 
Average) models 192 , 
327
asset monitor 123
architecture 124–126
enriching data 130–131
extracting data 127–129
processing assets 131–139
spreadsheets 126
assets 2 –8
bonds 4
choosing 8
cryptocurrency 5
derivatives 6
ETFs (exchange-traded 
funds) 4
forex (foreign exchange) 
market 5
funds 5
other assets 7
private equity 6
stocks 3
asset-specific risk 147
automated trading 12autonomous driving 80
ethics and security 81
known brands 82–84
AWS (Amazon Web 
Services) 232
AWS Data Exchange 276
B
B2B (business-to-business) 
companies 69 , 275
backtesting 283 –287
balance sheet 25 , 58
bar charts 251
BCG (Boston Consulting 
Group) Framework 106 , 
164, 223
bearish hypothesis 24
behavioral finance 182
big data 276 –278
big companies 276
demographic data 277
media 277
movement data 277
Big Short, The  (film) 275
bikeshedding 146
blockchain 6
Bollinger Bands 260 –262
bonds 4 , 112–116, 137
breakout 249
brokers
exchanges 338
orders 289
Buffett, Warren 30 , 275

INDEX 340
bullish hypothesis 22
burn rate 45 , 318
business model, validating
301–302
buying overperformers 177
C
candlesticks 254 –256
anatomy of candlestick 
chart 254
patterns 256
CapEx (capital expenses) 26
capitalization 32
cash-secured put 162
catalysts 278 –282
disasters 281
distressed companies 279
earnings calls 281
events 165
interest rate changes 282
mergers and acquisitions
278
CCA (comparable company 
analysis) 312
CDOs (collateralized debt 
obligations) 116
CDS (credit default swap) 116
CFA (Chartered Financial 
Analyst) 113
charts 239 –253
alternative chart types
250–251
interpreting 249
interpreting price changes 
with 253–267
patterns 247–249
reading 246
Streamlit 267–271
classification approach 183
Coca-Cola Company 108
code generation 201
collecting data, commercial 
libraries 67
complex trading signals
287–289
contrarian investor 247
correlation 153 –156
coupon payments 113
coupons 4
covered call 161
credit risk 4credit spread 163
cryptocurrencies 5 , 138
crypto exchanges 290
curiosity 323
current ratio 34
cycles, economic, sectors and 30
D
DAG (directed acyclic 
graph) 234
Dalio, Ray 328
data
call 234–237
collecting, commercial 
libraries 67
exporting 337
extracting 127–129
financial data 53–54
loading 232
preparing 234
database, cloud 336
DATABASE_ID parameter 225
data collection 52
Alpha Vantage 73
EODHD 71
financial analysis 
platforms 54–56
Finviz 69
libraries 76
notebooks 57
OpenBB 75
yfinance 57–66
data science, notebooks 57
day trading 12
DCA (dollar-cost averaging)
158
DCF (discounted cash flow) 
method 37 , 312
DDL (Data Definition 
Language) 125 , 223
debt 36
D/E (debt-to-equity) ratio 36 , 
61
DEI (diversity, equity, and 
inclusion) 325
demographic data 277
derivatives 6 , 159–163
development environment 334
Anaconda 334
PyCharm 335
VS Code 335dilution 45 , 314
direct investment 7
disasters 281
distressed companies 279
diversification 163
dividends 40 , 106–112
growth 109
payout frequency 108
yield 108
documentation 337
Domain-Driven Design  (Evans) 19
Dunning-Kruger effect 322
E
earnings 36
calls 281
surprise 281
EBIT (Earnings Before Interest 
and Taxes) 36
economic cycles, sectors and 30
economic moat 84 , 107
EDGAR (Electronic Data 
Gathering, Analysis, and 
Retrieval system) 232
efficient market theory 193
EMA (exponential moving 
average) 257
environments 330
cloud 336–337
environment setup 332 –333
EPS (earnings per share) 33 , 36, 
87
equity, defined 3
ESG (environmental, social, and 
governance) 45 , 194, 325
factors 141
ETFs (exchange-traded 
funds) 4 , 62, 125, 135–137, 
209, 306
Euronext Amsterdam 
(AEB) 132
Evans, Eric 19
EV (Enterprise Value) 312
exchanges
ledgers and 117
orders 289
exits 304 –306
exporting data 337
external assessments 46 –49
ratings 47
target prices 48

INDEX 341
F
face value 114
factors 183
FCF (free cash flow) 26 , 37
features, defined 188
finance chat 206 –208
financial data 53 –54
Finviz platform 55 , 69
float, defined 44
fluctuations 146
FMCW (frequency-modulated 
continuous wave) 85
forex (foreign exchange) 
market 5
founders 311
FRED (Federal Reserve Eco-
nomic Data) 167
FSE (Frankfurt Stock 
Exchange) 132
FullRatio 33
fundamental analysis, 
yfinance 58 –61
fundamental data 53
funding stages 303 –304
funds, types of 5
futures, defined 160
G
GAAP (Generally Accepted 
Accounting Principles) 20
Gemini 182 , 204
GenAI (Generative AI) 11 , 68
machine learning vs. 198–201
practical use of 201–208
GICS (Global Industry Classifica-
tion Standard) 28
Gladwell, Malcolm 328
Graham, Benjamin 275
growth investing 13 , 105
growth portfolios 78
investment thesis 79–84
LiDAR market 85–95
ongoing analysis 97–101
H
hedge funds 5
hedging 15 , 160–165
derivatives 160–163
diversification 163pair trading 163
risk pairing 164
HFT (high-frequency trading)
12, 158, 290, 328
histograms 251 , 263
HMA (Hull moving 
average) 257
Hugging Face 182
I
Ichimoku Cloud 264 –267
IDE (Integrated Development 
Environment) 275 , 334
IFRS (International Financial 
Reporting Standards) 21
income investing 13
income portfolios 105
bonds 112–116
dividends 106–112
early retirement 121
staking 117–120
income statement 22 –25
incubators 300
indenture 113
industry classification 28 –32
influences on GICS sectors
28
sectors and economic 
cycles 30
insider transactions 44
Intelligent Investor, The  
(Graham) 275
Interactive Brokers
extracting data 129
orders 292
interest rate changes 282
investing 19
activist investing 325
analytical investor 1
approaches to 8–14
journey 2
measures of control
326–329
investment advice 323
investment essentials
debt 36
industry classification
28–32
liquidity 34
metrics and ratios 33
ownership 44–45profitability 40
sustainability 45
valuation 37
investment thesis 79 –84
challenging the idea
81–84
starting with an idea 79
your investment thesis 84
iron condor 162
iShares MSCI World ETF 
(URTH) 121
ISIN (International Securities 
Identification 
Number) 138
ITM (in the money) 162
K
K-means clustering 185
KYC (Know Your Customer) 
process 157 , 330
L
labels 188
large-cap 32
leverage 159
liabilities 25
libraries 76
LiDAR (Light Detection and 
Ranging) 82 , 84, 233
LiDAR market
debt 91–92
management 92
picking candidates 86–88
price development 88–91
projected earnings 94–95
technology and 
partnership 92–94
liquidity 26 , 34
LLMs (large language 
models) 68 , 81, 169, 181, 
273, 316, 322, 330, 337
as research assistants
201–203
integrating into code
203–208
logarithmic returns 65
long position 12
lower band 261
LSE (London Stock 
Exchange) 58

INDEX 342
M
M&A (mergers and 
acquisitions) 278
MACD line 262
MACD (Moving Average Conver-
gence Divergence) 262 –
264
margin of safety 158
market capitalization 37
market risk 147
Markowitz-efficient 
portfolio 170 –174
matplotlib library 331
maturation date 113
max_tokens parameter 205
MCPs (model context 
protocols) 222
mean metric 66
mean reversion 247
media 97 , 277
mega-cap 32
merge_fin_data function 132
merge_value_into_df 
function 136
metrics 33
micro-cap 32
mid-cap 32
middle band 260
mining 118
ML (machine learning) 28 , 54, 
181–182, 273
generative AI vs. 198–201
market challenges 192–195
narrowing scope 197
supervised learning
188–192
technical challenges
195–196
unsupervised learning
184–187
moats, economic 108
Monte Carlo simulation 151
movement data 277
moving average ribbons 259
mplfinance library 255
MPT (modern portfolio 
theory) 170
Munger, Charlie 275
mutual funds 5
MVP (minimum viable 
product) 298 –300N
NaN (not a number) values 258
NAV (net asset value) 5 , 136
navPrice ratio 136
negligence 157
news sentiment analysis 100
NLP (natural language 
processing) 198
nomadism 324
nonfinancial data 54 , 274–278
big data 276–278
nonfinancial risks 202
notebooks 57
NYSE (New York Stock 
Exchange) 58
O
one-shot prompting 229 –231
OpenAI 182 , 203
OpenBB 75
operational design domain 93
OpEx (operating expenses) 26
options, types of 6 , 160
orders 289 –294
exchanges vs. brokers 289
executing 292–294
modifiers 291–292
OTM (out of the money) 162
outliers, defined 183
Outliers  (Gladwell) 328
out of the money (OTM) 162
overfitting 195
ownership 44
stock-based compensation 
and dilution 45
P
pair trading 163
pandas library 331
par value 114
passively managed ETFs 4
patterns 247 –249
payment modalities 113
payout ratio 42 , 109
PEG (price/earnings-to-growth) 
ratio 38
P/E (price-to-earnings) ratio
10, 20, 33, 38, 135, 312
pip package manager 331pitching, explained 301 –302
portfolios 13
growth investing 13
income investing 13
value investing 13
PoS (Proof-of-Stake) consensus 
mechanism 119
PoW (Proof-of-Work) consensus 
mechanism 118
premium, defined 6
price-to-book ratio 39
price-to-sales ratio 39
principal, defined 4
Principle: Life and Work  
(Dalio) 328
private equity 6
investing in start-ups 298–306
investment vehicles 306–312
profitability 40
prompt engineering 208 –213
investor profile 208–210
using prompts to find compa-
nies to invest in 211–213
put option 6
PyCharm 335
PyPI (Python Package Index) 71
Python 330 –332
libraries and APIs 331
python_binance API 138
Q
qualitative research 11
quantitative research 10
Quant Rating 47
quarterly_ identifier 59
quick ratio 34
R
R&D (research and develop-
ment)   22
RAG databases 221
RAG (Retrieval-Augmented 
Generation) 217
RAG (retrieval-augmented 
generation) 231 –237
call 234–237
loading data 232
preparing data 234
RAGs (Retrieval-Augmented 
Generations) 212 , 323

INDEX 343
random walk 193
ratings 47
ratios, defined 33
rebalancing 176 –179
Shiller P/E ratio 174
regression 183
REITs (real estate investment 
trusts) 13 , 43, 111
RenTech (Renaissance 
Technologies) 197 , 276
residence of company 109
resilience 159
resistance lines 249
retirement, early 121
ride-hailing services 82
risk-averse investor 208
risk avoidance 157 –159
risk management 143
generating risk profiles 
for individual stocks
150–156
hedging 160–165
human factor 156–160
nonfinancial risk 165–169
portfolio optimization
169–179
ukemi 144–150
risk pairing 164
risk profiles, generating for indi-
vidual stocks 150 –156
correlation 153–156
VaR 150–153
risk rating 113
risks 95 –97
and rewards 15
falling into obsolescence 96
globalization and conflicts
97
squashed by industry 
giants 96
ROA (return on assets) 40
ROE (return on equity) 40
S
SA Analyst Rating 47
SAM (serviceable available 
market) 301
SBC (stock-based 
compensation) 45
scaling start-ups 303 –304
scatterplots 251scheduled event 220
scoring
business model 318
capital intensity and burn 
rate 318
clients and strategic 
partnerships 316
country of origin 317
domain 317
economic moat 318
existing investors 316
founders and advisors 316
incubator and accelerator
316
individual North Star 
Metrics 318
network effect 318
regulation 317
Scrum 157
secrets managers 332 , 337
sector risk 147
Security Analysis  (Graham) 275
selling underperformers 177
shareholder equity 25
Shiller P/E ratio 174
short selling 12 , 159
short-term trading 12
signal line 263
simple returns 65
slippage 288
small-cap 32
SMA (simple moving 
average) 257 , 283
SMEs (small and midsize 
enterprises) 32
SMRs (Small Modular 
Reactors) 164
Snowflake Marketplace 276
SOM (serviceable obtainable 
market) 301
source code repository 333
spreadsheets 126
SPV (Special Purpose 
Vehicle) 310
SREs (site reliability 
engineers) 146
Stage class 234
staking 117 –120
affordable options 119
ledgers and exchanges 117
mining and 118
stalking horse agreement 280start-ups 297 –306
accelerator 302
assessing 312–318
exits 304–306
incubators 300
investment vehicles 306–312
minimum viable product 
(MVP) 298–300
pitching 301
scaling 303–304
validating business 
model 301–302
std (standard deviation) 66 , 153
stock price prediction 190
stocks 3 , 131–135
generating risk profiles for 
individual stocks 150–156
stock screeners 55
stock worksheet 134
stop-loss orders 144
in practice 145
Streamlit 267 –271
strike price 6
successfully failed 304
summarizing documents 201
supervised learning 183 , 
188–192
building analytical 
datasets 188–190
stock price prediction 190
support line 249
sustainability 45 –46
swaps, defined 160
SWFs (Sovereign Wealth 
Funds) 311
swing trading 12
SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, and threats) 
analysis 81 –84
systemic risk 146
T
TAM (total addressable 
market) 301
target prices 48
taxes 145
TDD (test-driven 
development) 144 , 283
technical analysis 150 , 239
yfinance 61–66
technical data 53

INDEX 344
temperature parameter 204 –205
tenbaggers 32
time value of money 22
TMO (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific) 111
trading
algorithmic 12
asset monitors 12
brokers and exchanges 338
trading algorithms 282 –289
backtesting 283–287
complex trading signals 287–
289
transaction costs 145
treemaps 251
trend analysis 98
TWS (Trader Workstation) 129 , 
338
U
UI (user interface) 54
ukemi 144 –150
risk classification 146–148risk measurement 148–150
stop-loss 144
underfitting 195
unsupervised learning
183–187
unsystematic risk 147
upper band 261
URTH (iShares MSCI World 
ETF) 121
user query 220
V
V2X (vehicle-to-everything) 
communication 83
valuation 37 , 312–314
value investing 13 , 105
vanilla bond 113
variance metric 66
VaR (value at risk) 150 –153
var (variance) 153
venture capital 308
VIX (CBOE Volatility 
Index) 277volatility 195
VOO (Vanguard S&P 500 
ETF) 121
VR (virtual reality) 16
VS Code (Visual Studio 
Code) 335
VSE (Vienna Stock 
Exchange) 132
W
Wall Street  (film) 275
Wall Street Rating 47
WMA (weighted moving 
average) 257
Y
yfinance 57 –66
fundamental analysis
58–61
library 56
limitations of 66
technical analysis 61–66

A reference workflow for an AI agent
User
Event
(scheduled/alert)
External data sourcesData IngestOrchestrator
Web SearchRetrieval Generation Review
MailLLM LLM
RAG
DBMCP
Data
ProviderLLM
DocDBMessenger
Output AI agentLLMs
Input
Additional data sources

Stefan Papp
ISBN-13: 978-1-63343-580-3
Aprogrammer has a unique edge when it comes to invest-
ing. Using open-source Python libraries and AI tools, 
you can perform sophisticated analysis normally reserved 
for expensive fi  nancial professionals. Th  is book guides you 
step-by-step through building your own stock analysis tools, forecasting models, and more so you can make smart, data-driven investment decisions. 
Investing for Programmers  shows you how to analyze invest-
ment opportunities using Python and machine learning. In this easy-to-read handbook, experienced algorithmic inves-tor Stefan Papp shows you how to use Pandas, NumPy, and Matplotlib to dissect stock market data, uncover patterns, and build your own trading models. You’ll also discover how to use 
AI agents and LLM s to enhance your fi  nancial research 
and decision-making process. 
What’s Inside
● Build stock analysis tools and predictive models
● Design algorithmic trading strategies
● Use AI to automate investment research
● Analyze market sentiment with media data mining
For professional and hobbyist Python programmers with basic 
personal fi  nance experience.
Stefan Papp  combines 20 years of investment experience in 
stocks, cryptocurrency, and bonds with decades of work as a data engineer, architect, and software consultant.
For print book owners, all digital formats are free:
https:/ /www.manning.com/freebook
Investing for ProgrammersBUSINESS
MANNING“Especially valuable for 
anyone looking to improve 
  their investing.”— Armen Kherlopian
Covenant Venture Capital
 
“A great breadth of topics—
from basic fi  nance concepts to 
cutting-edge technology.”—Ilya Kipnis, Quantstrat T rader
 
“A top tip for people who 
want to leverage development 
skills to improve their 
  investment possibilities.”—Michael Zambiasi
Raiff eisen Digital Bank
 
“Brilliantly bridges
the worlds of coding 
  and fi  nance.”—Th omas Wiecki, PyMC Labs

